NISTIR 4738
Models, Managing Models,
Quality Models:
An Example of Quality
Management
Joan
E. Tyler
DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
Natlosal InstMute of Standards
and Tsdinology
Manufacturing Enginsaring laboratory
Factory Automation Syatams Division
OMthorsburg, MD 20899
UA DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
Robart A. Mosbachar, Sacratsry
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS
AND TECHNOLOGY
Joho ¥L Lyons, Dlractor
NIST

\

NISTIR 4738
Models, Managing Models,
Quality Models:
An Example of Quality
Management
Joan
E. Tyler
U^. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
National
Institute of Standards
and Technology
Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory
Factory Automation Systems Division
O^thersburg, MD 20899
December 1991
U^. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
Robert A. Mosbacher, Secretary
NATKNIAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS
AND TECHNOUMY
Mm WL Lyons, Director

\

MODELS, MANAGING MODELS, QUALITY MODELS:
AN EXAMPLE OF QUALITY MANAGEMENT
Joan E. Tyler
Factory Automation Systems Division
Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory
National Institute of Standards and Technology
Gaithersburg, MD 20899
“The concept of quality improvement is directly appiicabie to smaii companies as weii
as iarge, to sen/ice industries as weii as manufacturing, and to the pubiic sector as
weii as private enterprise,
in order to be successfui, quality improvement programs
must be management-ied and customer-oriented and this may require fundamental
changes in the way companies and agencies do business."
Excerpts from The Findings and Purposes Section of Public Law 100-107
responsible for creation of The Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award.
Abstract
Quality is an increasingly important element In competitiveness.
This paper will focus
on strategies used by an international standards committee for improving the
development of its complex standard. The paper outlines an approach for use within
the standards-making community.
Aside from the standards-making community, any
organization interested in establishing quality metrics and quality thresholds to assess
technical quality should find this paper useful. An overview of a methodology for
evaluating the technical quality of information and data models is also Included.
These models provide the basis for the emerging STEP standard. The types of
models denoted in the title include information, activity, data or process models which
are represented in some formal modeling language.
Quality thresholds to guide
information model developers and evaluators are described, along with an overview of
the team approach used in applying the methodology.
Quality management
techniques for models are described along with management's role In ensuring that
high quality models are produced. Many basic concepts of the Malcolm Baldrige
National Quality Award were used in building the foundation for this new approach to
standards development.
Key Words
Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award; data models; IGES/PDES Organization;
information models; IPO; PDES; Product Data Exchange using STEP; quality
management architecture; Standard for the Exchange of Product Model Data; STEP
The work described in this document was funded by the Factory Automation Systems Division, National institute of Standards and
Technology, U.S. Department of Commerce, Technology Administration and is not subject to copyright

1
Purpose
The purpose of this paper is to describe an organizational approach to ensuring the
quality of a design specification. The ongoing efforts of a committee developing an
international standard are used to illustrate the approach.
Methods for ensuring
quality must be appropriate to the products they intend to improve.
This paper
describes fundamental principles of quality assessment, such as continuous
improvement, management by fact, and the development and use of metrics, and their
application to a product which is a design spedfication, in this case, an international
standard.
Ensuring quality demands persistent application of quality techniques at
appropriate points in the product development process.’
2
Background
The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Is currently developing a
standard known as the Standard for the Exchange of Product Model Data (STEP)\
STEP is intended to support all aspects of product description from initial conception
through product design, manufacture, support and disposal.
U.S. proponents of STEP
have asserted that the application of product data sharing will revolutionize U.S.
manufacturing and enable U.S. industry to build on Its traditional strengths to regain
its
competitive edge for the twenty-first century [1].
U.S. industry supports STEP development through the IGES/PDES^ Organization
(IPO). The primary objective of the PDES/STEP effort Is to develop a standardized,
neutral, computer-based format for the definition cf product data that can be used by
different industrial applications [2].
Information modeling technology provides a formal technique for representing the
information requirements of the standard. Why is the development of STEP based
upon the use of information modeling technology? Rgure
1
illustrates the basic
elements leading to this dedsion:
(1)
An information model provides a mechanism for describing
agreements about a subject and stating the requirements.
STEP will be adopted as ISO 10303, Industrial Automation Systems and Integration Product Data
Representation and Exchange, and Is being developed within Subcommittee 4 of International Organization
for Standardization Technical Committee 184 (ISO TC184/SC4).
* IGES, the
Initial Graphics Exchange Specification, defines a neutral data format that allows for the
digital exchange of Information among compiuter-alded design (CAD) systems. The PDES (Product Data
Exchange using STEP) project within the IPO is the United States development activity in support of the
international standard.
2

(2)
Information modeling techniques provide the capability to
formulate a computer-based representation of an information
model.
(3)
An information model facilitates communication by providing a
baseline for building consensus.
(4)
Infomiation modeling techniques concentrate on the dka
requirements without prescribing or specifying implementation
requirements.
Figure 1.
information Models Form the Basis for the Standard
syn*tax
1 : the arrangement of elements
to show their relationship to one
another
seMnan*tlc
1 : or or relating to meaning
in language
Figure
1 places the design aspects of information modeling in a much larger context.
The ultimate objective is a common understanding of semantics and a standard syntax
for information specification. These features are two of the benefits derived from
using this technology to drive the standard. These benefits, coupled with the
requirement for achieving consensus, are key reasons for using this technology for
STEP.
The standard itself will consist of a set of information models that describe product
data to be used by many industries. The STEP models contain general information
about product descriptions, business rules, market requirements, design, manufacture,
and support. They are either resource models or application models.
Resource
models describe aspects of product information such as: geometry, tolerance, shape,
size, weight. The application models contain information specific to a particular
domain such as: manufacturing, electronics, apparel, building and construction, etc.
3

The resource models are reusable and will remain the cornerstone for future
development.
The focus of this paper is on the approach taken by the STEP qualification methods
team in developing a system of metrics for ensuring the quality of information models.
The quality techniques were developed to be appropriate for the information modeling
methods used by STEP. The notion of continuous improvement is advocated. The
quality management process developed for STEP Includes regular cycles of planning,
execution and evaluation. The quality management process begins early in the STEP
model development process and feedback is provided to both the qualification
methods team and model development team.
Investigation of quality methods for
other types of models continues in attempts to apply them to the quality management
of information models.
This approach was influence by efforts to promote the use of
quality management techniques in U.S. built products, which is the subject of the
following section.
3 The Baldrige Influence
Many basic concepts of the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Awarcf were used in
building the foundation for this new approach to standards development The
qualification methods team gained useful information and insight through an in<iepth
examination of the Award Criteria in the 1991 edition of the Application Guidelines [3]
for the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award.
Several key characteristics directly influenced the development of the model
qualification methods. A more detailed description can be found in the 1992 edition of
the Award Criteria [4] for the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award, excerpted
here:
(1)
The Award Criteria are directed toward producing results.
Assessment
of these results Is based upon one or more of three factors: (1)
improvement trends; (2) current levels; and (3) benchmarks, evaluations,
and other comparisons that establish levels and trends relative to the
performance of others, especially appropriately selected leaders.
(2)
The Award Criteria provide a link between processes and results.
Integration in the Criteria is achieved through many direct and indirect
relationships and linkages among the requirements,
in addition, many
parts of the Criteria call for aggregation and assessment of levels of
performance, thus encouraging an integrated view of all activities.
^ The
National
Institute
of Standards and Technology (NIST), an agency of the Department
of
Commerce’s Technology Administration, was given the responsibility for the creation and management of
the Award Program.
4

(3)
The Award Criteria are part of a two-part diagnostic system.
The Criteria
focus on requirements.
The scoring system focuses on the factors that
should be used in assessing strengths and areas for improvement.
Together the two parts of the diagnostic system direct attention to
activities that contribute to reaching the goals of the Criteria.
(4)
The Award Criteria include key learning cycles. The arrows in Figure 2
[4] denote linkage and dynamic relationships and feedback among the
framework elements. The primary dynamic characteristic of the Criteria
is their inclusion of cycles of continuous improvement.
These cycles of
learning, adaptation, and improvement are explicit and implicit in every
part of the Criteria The cycles have four stages: (a) planning, design of
processes, selection of indicators, deployment of requirements; (b)
execution of plans; (c) assessment of progress, taking into consideration
internal and external indicators; and (d) revision of plans, taking into
consideration progress, learning, and new information.
Figure 2.
Baldrige Award Criteria Framework
BALORIGE AWARD CRITERIA FRAMEWORK
Dynamic Relationships
5

These specific characteristics are cited to give the reader an idea of how these
generic criteria can be used to tailor a system for another domain. The Criteria can
also aid developers searching for assessment techniques.
These Baldrige concepts played a central role in the development of the metrics to
verify the quality of information models supporting the STEP standard.
Probably the
most important lesson learned Is that high quality thresholds are attainable with
appropriate strategies and persistent application. A recent General Accounting Office
Study [5] revealed that to succeed, Total Quality Management (TQM) systems must
be based on a continuous and systemic approach of gathering, evaluating, and acting
on facts and data The model qualification team’s development effort to support
quality ideals were built around these notions.
4
Need for a Model Quality Strategy
While there are many advantages to using information modeling technology as
suggested in Section 2, there are also risks in using
it as the underpinning of a
standard. An effective quality strategy can be used to manage these risks.
The models in STEP will be ready for standardization when they are coherent,
complete and stable. The need for a quality strategy becomes apparent from the fact
that in many of the STEP models, the Information content was changing and
consequently the models seemed to be incomplete. There was no consistent method
for applying the information modeling techniques used in STEP.
Integrating
information from many resources is an important phase In the life cycle of developing
STEP.
This is a function of the Integration Committee^ The groups responsible for
the models may have achieved technical consensus, but the models were not usable
because they could not be understood outside the group that developed them. As
one of the engineers from a well known aircraft company put
it: 'Without building in
quality as the standard emerges, there is a risk that my company will be using a
standard based on untried, untested foundations."
This is an important concern for
companies which build products to the standard or the companies which buy products
built to the standard. To mitigate this problem, the quality strategy must include
techniques for recognizing stable and reliable models and evaluating the consistency
of the model representation.
Because many countries are demanding a workable STEP now.
It is important to
project an accurate estimate of when the models will be ready for external review.
Sometimes, progress on models could not be discerned. There were a number of
plausible explanations, such as unavailability of subject matter experts or a decision to
modify the extent of the model coverage. Some explanations require no action by
management and others provide warning signals that call for immediate action.
It is
* The Integration Committee of the IPO is supporting a project within Working Group 4 (WG4) of ISO
TC184/SC4.
6

important that both progress and warning signals are visible to management.
Therefore, the quality strategy must include techniques for evaluating and reporting
upon progress.
A requirement of STEP is that the models be integrated into a single usable standard.
The Integration Committee is responsible for ensuring that models can be used
together. Using poorly organized or improperly documented models for the integration
is
undesirable because
it leads to an unacceptable margin for error. A model needs
to be of sufficient quality for the integration team to understand the model intent. The
quality strategy must include techniques for evaluating the organization and
documentation of the models.
A number of things can go wrong during the development of models. A strategy is
needed for recognizing concerns and taking corrective action as early in the process
as possible. The quality strategy must proactively seek both external and internal
users’ expectations at the beginning of any quality planning and development process.
5 The Model Qualification Approach
A new approach for ensuring quality and measuring
it has been developed for the
PDES/STEP effort. The approach focuses on the quality of design specifications, for
resource and application models.
This quality method can be extended to related
technologies with only minor tailoring.
The method developed and used in the STEP community, under the direction of the
Qualification Methods project^, has often been referred to as "Qualification," the
process of using the methods developed by the qualification methods team.
Qualification takes piace before the integration process described in Section 4. The
Qualification process imposes a set of criteria on ail STEP resource and application
models.
Model qualification verifies the technical quality of models at various levels
of completion. As progress on a model is made, the audience which can comprehend
the model expands.
The notion of model quality as
it pertains to product data has its roots in the PDES
Initiation Activities [6]. Much of the early evaluation was done intuitiveiy, but this early
thinking fostered many of the ideas in the current document on the qualification
process [7].
There is now a more formal method for both measuring and managing
model quality.
When the model meets the established metrics, the true functionality of the model
itself can be more accurately determined. These measurements can help determine
if
a modei has attained a level of quality sufficient to be promoted in the standards
® Qualification Methods Is a project within Working Group 5 of ISO TC184/SC4.
7

process. The measurements in the approach are quantifiable and can be very useful
in making management decisions.
This approach to quality assurance differs from those of other quality assurance
systems in two respects.
Rrst the methodology provides for ensuring quality in
information models. The methodology ensures that the models are understandable,
stable, reliable, and maintainable.
Second,
it provides structured techniques for
managing quality.
It manages quality in a formal way by organizing the technical
knowledge conveyed by a model into manageable groupings, and by providing
techniques for tracking and assessing the development for each grouping. Thus for
example, "maintainability" is affected by specific measur^le indicators.
The model qualification measurement system includes:
the identification of indicators to be used in quality assessment,
the definition of a technique for measuring progress, and
the provision for the management of staff resources.
6
Model Qualification Methodology
This section describes the methodology developed for the review of STEP models.
This methodology builds on the model qualification approach discussed in Section 5.
in addition, a short example of the application of the methodology is given in Section
6 .2 .
6.1
Model Quality Levels
Model quality levels represent a generic measure of quality that can be applied to any
measurable aspect of quality (i.e., across ail categories and indicators).
Levels signify
an increasingly meaningful and useful condition or state of quality. As the levels of
quality of a model increase, the model should become more valuable and be of use to
a wider audience.
The quality levels are related to the promotion levels in the standardization process,
as specified in the procedures for approval of STEP [8]. The definitions for each of
the quality levels used in STEP are given in Table 1.
For a model to be released to a
broad community for review,
it should have attained a measure of progress equivalent
to Quality Level 3
(i.e., the model can be dearly understood).
8

Table 1.
Quality Levels
Level
Tttle
Description
LmraiO
Baseline
Estebilshed
The work kern has been identifted and scope of the
activity has been defined. The oorfext of the work tern
Is defned at a level neoessaiy to attain manaoemerX
approval to proceed.
1
Initial
Ooeumentatien
TTte work kern has been identified and scope of the
actMty has been defined. The ootkexi of the work kem
is defined at a level necessary to attain managemerk
approval to proceed.
Uv«12
Beale
Comprehenalen
Anyone with a POES/STEP background oan
unoerataitd the eeaenfial Htodel oortoepts.
Uv«iS
Clartty of
Understandlno
Model is documented sutficlentiy to support prototype
implementatiort
|jMet4
Preeltion of
Expression
The definition and represerkation of the model or part
enablea subject area experts who have not participated
in the development to apply ks oonoapts oonsistently
to real-world problems.
L«v«l6
Industrial
Buitabilitv
The model is suffidentiy defined for the use and
implefnentation in an industrial application context.
The Measures of Progress Report depicted in Rgure 3 shows the level of completion
necessary to be a "qualified model", the target quality, and the actual quality level that
the model has attained.
Across the horizontal axis are categories for the quality of the
model component being evaluated, and the vertical axis shows the quality levels (see
Table 1) for assessing the semantics for the information modeling technique used.
Figure 3.
Measures of Progress Report
T«g«Qa.niy
AcnulQualUy
/
I
I
|/f-
I
5
T
^
•
4
f
f
fu....
3
2
1
0
Sees*
CBCCt
Eiped-
llM
Ota-
wry
-
-
QUAUTY CATEGORIES
The methodology calls for the assignment of quality levels based upon an evaluation
that uses three technical components.
Each of these have specific criteria for
measuring progress to determine the extent of improvement required.
In this section,
the first component, quality categories, is explicitly described, while the other two
components, quality indicators and quality characteristics are only briefly
introduced.
Sections 6.2 and 7 describe how these three components are applied.
9

6.1.1
Model Quality Categories
The quality categories referenced in Figure 3 are broad classes of subjects which are
used to organize the quality measurement.
This division for overall quality
measurement can be done either by identifying the required components of the
completed product or by identifying activities in the development process.
Both of
these approaches to defining the quality categories have been used in STEP. The
categories provide a high-level view of the types of quality assessments performed on
a model.
However, each quality category Is related to the model as a whole and not
just to a section of the model.
For instance, quality category 1, Scope, is used heavily
in evaluating the scope statement that is present in each STEP model, but
it is also
used to evaluate any issues related to scope across the entire model.
Thirteen
categories are used in the STEP qualification process, as shown in Table 2.
Table 2.
Quality Categories
QualHy Cateqory
Title
QC1
Scope
.
QC2
References
QC3
Expositions for Understandabilitv
QC4
Glossarv
QCS
Model Desion History Capture
QC6
Confiauration Manaaement Conformance
QC7
Information Requirements Compliance
QCS
Syntax Evaluation
QC9
Formal Semantic Representation
QC9.1 Model Language Usage
QC9.2 Semantics
QC9.3 Model StabiTrty
QC10
Inteqration
QC11
Industrial Assessment
QC12
Industrial Exposure & ReooqnKion
QC13
ISO Directives
6.1.2
Model Quality Indicators
Quality indicators are the concrete, measurable aspects of quality for any given
category. The Indicator is measured by evaluating one or more facts about a product.
Each fact that is to be evaluated is called a quality characteristic.
Each time a model
is evaluated, the quality indicators are assigned a quality level. The quality level is
determined by an^yzlng the assessment results from the set of constituent quality
characteristics.
6.1.3
Quality Characteristics
Quality characteristics are specific measurable aspects of quality.
Quality
characteristics are like a checklist of information about states, conditions, events and
10

data for a given quality indicator.
Each quality characteristic has a measurement
technique associated with
it.
For example, some characteristics, such as a statement
of scope in the model document, either exist or are absent (pass or fail).
6.2 Example for STEP Information Models
Due to space limitations, a sample is provided here for only one of the
1 3 categories
listed in Table 2.
The following example for the category Scope details how the
quality categories, indicators and characteristics are used to judge the quality of a
model. A model must contain a "scope" statement and the criteria for this aspect are
grouped into the category called "scope."
Guidance is provided for assigning a
quality level to the category "scope." There are five quality indicators for "scope."
Each indicator has its own set of descriptive characteristics. The set of quality
characteristics for the quality indicator 1 .1
, "limits of applicability covered," is provided.
Category: Scope (QC1)
Scope is defined to be a complete and unambiguous statement or view of the domain
that is being studied.
This statement should define the bounds of the information to
be covered in the model, and with this in mind, the scope can either be broad or
narrow. The statement should define any limits that apply to the subject matter found
in the model.
For this reason, the scope statement can describe material that should
or should not be found in the model.
Quality Levels for the Category **ScoDe”
During the development of the model, quality progresses through the quality
levels defined in Table 1. Once an initial statement has been agreed to by the
group developing the model, Level
1 has been attained. The model will evolve
with nominal change until the model has achieved a Level 2.
However, the
scope should crystallize by Level 3, with a complete and predse statement by
Level 4.
At Level 4, tests which simulate representative uses for the model are
defined and the model is examined to ensure that
it can support the tests for
scope.
At Level 5, a more global perspective is pursued by studying the
relationship of this model scope to those In other existing models in STEP. The
model is examined for any overlap with other models and how the model is
logically organized with respect to the rest of STEP. An unambiguous scope
definition which is consistent with the remaining STEP spedfications is
expected by Level 5.
Quality Indicators for the Category ”ScoDe'*
Ql 1.1
Limits of applicability coyered:
This indicator is used to evaluate the
definition and intent of the model. Any guidance or rules that should be applied
to verify that the model achieves this intent are also included.
11

Ql 1.2
Definition of subjects and aspects covered:
This indicator is used to
evaluate the definitions of terms and how the model will be used.
Ql 1.3
Global planning perspective covered:
This indicator is used to
evaluate
if the model describes how the information represented by a model fits
into a larger scale,
i.e., "the big picture". A context on a very broad scale is
provided, along with a smaller context which represents the actual model under
review.
Ql 1.4
Subject planning perspective covered:
This Indicator is used to
evaluate
if the model provides a high-level oven^iew of the information that is
within the scope of the model.
All of the significant concepts in the model
under review should be represented. They should be consistent with the
viewpoint of the scope but the details on concepts are not provided.
Ql 1.5
Project planning perspective covered:
This indicator is used to
evaluate
if the model provides for the viewpoint of the project in broad enough
terms to include both the subject planning model
(i.e., the significant concepts)
and the interfaces to any related models. This model acts as an Integrator and
project management tool since
it identifies the information requirements needed
by the related models.
Quality Characteristics for ”Umits of Applicability Statement (Ql I.IV*
The scope statement should be reviewed for the existence of the following
items which indicate increasing levels of quality:
QCh 1.1.1 Scoping definition statement which specifies the position of the
model within a larger context;
QCh 1.1.2 Statement that explains the scope early in the text with prominent
appearance;
QCh 1.1.3 Preliminary limits of applicability statement;
QCh 1.1.4 Complete and unambiguous statement of scope;
QCh 1.1.5 Statement referencing any other STEP models that are needed to
understand or use the model;
QCh 1.1.6 Boundaries, limits, rules or conventions that determine
all aspects of
scope;
QCh 1.1.7 Criteria for determining
if the scope has been achieved, defined
precisely enough for subject area experts; criteria demonstrates clarity, is
obvious, and is firmly stated; and
12

QCh 1.1.8 Precision of terms used within the subject domain are evident; and
exceptions are identified; terms are concrete, specific, and limited in extent.
7
Model Assessment Process
A Qualification Pradices team has been formed to execute reviews of the models In
STEP using this methodology and to provide feedback on the quality assessment
techniques. The team has developed a script for guiding their activity during the
review of the models and for applying the model qualification criteria [7]. The team
chooses the necessary quality indicators to apply to each, component of the models in
STEP. The team consists of individuals who are experts In the domain that the model
describes and individuals who are experts in the STEP development methods such as
information modeling. The team provides feedback to STEP developers in the form of
qualification reports. The team also provides feedback
to the Qualification Methods
team so that the model qualification methods can be further improved. The team
determines strengths of the model, identifies areas for improvement and states the
issues with the model.
The Qualification Practices team leader will organize and summarize the information.
These reports are principally used by the model development team. The two reports
listed below may also be useful to individuals who manage STEP development
because they illustrate both the progress and the areas where developer resources
need to be added in a particular area These summary reports could include: (1)
Measures of Progress Report (see Rgure 3), and (2) Evaluators for Model
Qualification Report (see Rgure 4).
Figure 4.
Evaluators for Model Qualification
level
level 4
level 3
level 2
level
I
Quality
Indicator
Quality
Level
Quality
Characteristic
5.6
5.12
5.13
5.14
5. IS
4.U
4.U
413
4.1.4
413
3.11.
3.tf
3.12
3.13
3.M
3.13
ZV
2.12
2.13
2.M
2.13
I.U
I.V2
1.5,
1.9.
I.IO,
1 13
1.6,
1.14
1.7,
1.16
01
l.l
01
1.2
01 13
01
1.4
01
1.5
QC
I Scope
01
l.l Limits of AppllcaDinty Statement (Incluslon/Excluslon Criteria)
01
1.2 Definition of Subjects and Aspects Covered
01
1.3 Global Planning Model
01
1.4 Subject Planning Model
01
1.5 Project Planning Model
13

In the Evaluators for Model Qualification Report (see Rgure 4), the quality
characteristics that are to be reviewed for each quality indicator are identified.
Each
quality level has one or more characteristics associated with a given indicator. The
set of characteristics for a quality level and a given indicator are illustrated in the cells
of the matrix. A model is evaluated for the presence of each characteristic. The
model is graded by a specific indicator at the highest level for which ail of the
characteristics are present. The "measures of progress" can be defined as the
selected set of quality indicators that are appropriate for a quality assessment
problem. The scores for all of the quality indicators are then compared to the target
"measure of progress" (see Rgure 3) to determine
If the model is ready to progress to
the next stage in the standardization process.
The Qualification Practices team works closely with the Qualification Methods team to
provide the continuous feedback necessary for quality improvement.
There have been
regular cycles of enhanced model qualification methods from the methods team,
followed by trial and feedback from the practices team. These roles are depicted in
Rgure 5.
Figure 5.
Continuous Quaiity Improvement
14

8 Management Role
The model qualification process provides a structure for the assessment and collection
of technical knowledge about products, and structural components to support
managing product development.
This structure promotes "management by fact" by
providing visibility to the results of quality assessments.
The model qualification process provides a system that manages the model
development, model assessment, and model integration for STEP. The process
provides techniques for managing the complexity by:
(1)
compartmentalizing the model quality indicators, so that persons
with modeling skills or subject area knowledge can work on
different aspects of a problem; and
(2)
breaking a complex problem into recognizable components
so that the development of the model can be managed.
One aspect of this management technique is the use of target "measures of progress."
The first action required by management^ is to set the measures of progress for
model development. These target measures of progress play three roles In the STEP
development process.
(1 )
The first rote is to guide the team by setting and communicating
measurable targets for quality well In advance. The
development team can strive for the target quality and can use the
qualification metrics to buiid quality into the product.
(2)
The second role is to establish the minimum expected quality
for each stage In model development by stating the targets just
prior to each measurement of progress on the product.
(3)
The third role is to require a quality level for approval
measures by only allowing a model to move to the next stage of
development when the quality level has met or exceeded the
target measure of progress.
STEP, as an international standard, demands an appropriate level of quality. A model
must achieve the target quality level for the appropriate quality indicators before
it is
promoted to the next stage in the standards process.
It is the responsibility of
management to select the overall level of quality required, and to select the
appropriate set of quality indicators for each type of model.
^ The management function for this ISO effort is under the coordination, planning and directton of the
Project Management Advisory Group (PMAG) for STEP.
15

9 Summary
The goal of the "Model Qualification Process" is to shorten the time from technology
innovation to development and then introduction into the market by providing for
continuous process and quality improvement. The "Model Qualification Process" has
contributed to both the effectiveness and productivity of information modeling within
STEP. The Methodology is generic and can be used across industry boundaries for
assessing models and establishing quality thresholds. The methodology also
contributes to making STEP resource and application models more accessible to
industry, and to managing the quality of these models.
Other contributions from this
effort are:
(1)
criteria containing the concrete nature of quality indicators and
quality characteristics used to measure design products (the
models);
(2)
a quality management system structured to facilitate the capture of
technical quality knowledge;
(3)
a strategy that provides for formal management roles for directing,
tracking and assessing quality.
The paper presents a methodology that was tailored for ensuring quality In information
models. The quality methods from other domains were transferred to STEP. The
principles found in existing quality techniques were not directly transferable to STEP
Information models. The techniques were modified to be appropriate for the modeling
methods used by STEP. The reader should have sufficient information from the
example provided by STEP to use the Baldrige Award Criteria in another domain.
16

References
[1]
Bloom, H., Carver, G.; "Concurrent Engineering Through Product Data
Standards", NISTIR 4573, May 1991.
[2]
Henghold, W., Shumaker, G., and Baker, L; "Manufacturing and PDES: Crucial
Considerations (part one)," The Journal of Manufacturing,
Fall, 1989.
[3]
"1991 Application Guidelines, Malcolm Baldrige Quality Award," (available from
Office of Quality Programs, NIST, Bldg. 101/Rm. A-537, Gaithersburg, MD
20899).
[4]
"1992 Award Criteria, Malcolm Baldrige Quality Award," (available from Office of
Quality Programs, NIST, Bldg. 101/Rm. A-537, Gaithersburg, MD 20899).
[5]
"Management Practices:
U.S. Companies Improve Performance Through
Quality Efforts," U.S. General Accounting Office, GAO/NSIAD-91-190,
Washington, DC, 1991.
[6]
Kelly, J.C.; "Rnal Report of the PDES Logical Layer Initiation Task," April 28,
1986, (available from IGES/PDES/STEP Office, NIST, Bldg. 220/Rm. A-127,
Gaithersburg, MD 20899).
[7]
Jorgenson, B.R., Stumps, R., Tyler, J., Williams, A., Zimmerman, J.; "Model
Qualification Criteria for PDES/STEP^ ISO TC184/SC4/WG5 Working Draft N21
July 1991, (available from IGES/PDES/STEP Office, NIST, Bldg. 220/Rm.
A-1 27, Gaithersburg, MD 20899).
[8]
Smith, B.; "SC-4 Policy #
1
- SC-4 Procedures for Approval of STEP", Version
2, TC184/SC4 Committee, January 1991
(available from the IGES/PDES/STEP
Office, NIST, Bldg. 220/Rm. A127, Gaithersburg, MD
20899).
Acknowledgements
The author wishes to thank Mary Mitchell, Alice Settle-Raskin, Susan Katz,
Cita FurianI and Robert Chapman for their contributions in producing this document.
17

NIST-1 14A
(REV. 3-90)
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
1.
PUBUCATION OR REPORT NUMBER
NISTIR 4738
BIBLIOGRAPHIC DATA SHEET
2.
PERFORMING ORGANIZATION REPORT NUMBER
3.
PUBUCATION DATE
DECEMBER 1991
4.
TITLE AND SUBTITLE
Models, Managing Models, Quality Models;
An Exaitple of Qualit:y Management
5.
AUTHOR(S)
Joan E. Tyler
6.
PERFORMING ORGANIZATION (IF JOINT OR OTHER THAN NIST, SEE INSTRUCTIONS)
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
GAITHERSBURG, MD 20899
7.
CONTRACT/GRANT NUMBER
8.
TYPE OF REPORT AND PERIOD COVERED
9.
SPONSORINQ OROANIZATION NAME AND COMPLETE ADDRESS (STREET, CTTY, STATE, ZIP)
National Institute of Standards
& Technology
Factory Autoration Systems Division
Building 220, Rxm A127
Gaithersburg, MD
20899
10. SUPPLEMENTARY NOTES
11.
ABSTRACT
(A 20O-WORO OR LESS FACTUAL SUMMARY OF MOST SIQNIHCANT INFORMATION.
IF DOCUMENT INCLUDES A SIGNIFICANT BIBUOGRAPHY OR
UTERATURE SURVEY, MENTION IT HERE)
Quality is an increasingly iitportant element in ccnpetitiveness.
Ihis paper will focus
on strategies underway within a standards-making organization for inproving its complex
standard.
This paper explains the quality approach developed to function within this
standards environment.
Aside from the standards^naking conraanity, any organization inter-
ested in establishing quality metrics and quality thresholds to assess technical quality will
find this paper useful.
Also included is an overview of a methodology developed to verify
the technical quality of information and data models.
These models provide the basis for
the standard.
Ihe types of models denoted in the title include information, activity, data
or process models viiich are notated in seme formal modeling language.
Quality thresholds to
guide information model developers and evaluators are described, along with an overview of
the team approach used in applying the methodology.
A description of quality management for
models is included along with the roles of management in assuring that quality models are
produced.
12.
KEY WORDS
(6 TO 12 ENTRIES; ALPHABETICAL ORDER; CAPITALIZE ONLY PROPER NAMES; AND SEPARATE KEY WORDS BY SEMICOLONS)
Malcolm Baldridge National Quality Award; data models;
IGES/PDES Organization;
information
models;
IPO; PDFS; Product Data Exchar^e using STEP; quality management architecture;
Standard
for the Exchange of Product Model Data;
STEP
13. AVAILABIUTY
14. NUMBER OF PRINTED PAGES
X
UNUMITED
20
FOR OFFICIAL DISTRIBUTION. DO NOT RELEASE TO NATIONAL TECHNICAL INFORMATION SERVICE (NTIS).
ORDER FROM SUPERINTENDENT OF DOCUMENTS, U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE,
WASHINGTON, DC 20402.
15. PRICE
A02
_x_
ORDER FROM NATIONAL TECHNICAL INFORMATION SERVICE (NTIS), SPRINGHELD, VA 22161.
ELECTRONIC FORM

V'iA)
j
’
'I,,/.'-'
"" VM'
I
'
:
i
^ v,
..j
;.v',
iTj
I
i

I.