Program Handbook
Quality Assurance System
Registration
Requirements for
Facilities Under
Provisions of the Fastener
Quality Act
S. Wayne Stiefel
Robert L. Gladhill
Office of Standards Services
Technology Services
QC
100
U56
NO. 6263
1998
i
United States Department of Commerce
Technology Administration
National Institute of Standards and Technology

NISTIR 6263
Program Handbook
Quality Assurance System
Registration
Requirements for
Facilities Under
Provisions of the Fastener
Quality Act
S. Wayne Stiefel
Robert L. Gladhill
Office of Standards Services
Technology Services
December 1998
U. S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE
William M. Daley, Secretary
TECHNOLOGY ADMINISTRATION
Gary R. Bachula, Acting Under Secretary for Technology
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY
Raymond G. Kammer, Director

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge the assistance of Jogindar S. Dhillon of the Office of
Standards Services for researching the regulations as they pertained to accreditation of
registration bodies and registration of facilities.
Special thanks are also due to Gerry Funk for
her patience in reworking the manuscript through many drafts, and production of a well-
formatted handbook.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section
Page
1.0 INTRODUCTION
1
1
. 1
Definitions
2
2.0 REQUESTING EVALUATION
6
2.1 Who May Apply
6
2.2
Listing Fee
6
3.0 ACCREDITATION OF CERTAIN MANUFACTURING
FACILITIES AS LABORATORIES
6
4.0 FASTENER QUALITY ASSURANCE SYSTEM CRITERIA
7
4.1
Quality Management System
7
4.2 Raw Material Traceability
7
4.3
Subcontractor Traceability
7
4.4
Quality Assurance Plan
8
4.5
Quality Assurance Standards
8
5.0 TEST REPORT AND RECORD
REQUIREMENTS FOR QAS REGISTERED FACILITIES
9
5.1
Reports
9
5.2 Recordkeeping Requirements
9
5.3
Test Reports
11
6.0 SAMPLING
13
7.0 SUBCONTRACTING
13
8.0 MAINTAINING RECOGNIZED STATUS
13
8.1 NIST Surveillance/Observer Status
13
8.2 Proper Use of Registration Status and Claims
14
BIBLIOGRAPHY
15
v

1.0 INTRODUCTION
On November 16, 1990, the United States Congress enacted the Fastener Quality Act (FQA),
P.L. 101-592 (the Act). The Act was amended in 1996 by Section
1 1 of P.L. 104-113. The Act
protects the public safety by: (1) requiring that certain fasteners which are sold in commerce
conform to the specifications to which they are represented to be manufactured; (2) providing for
accreditation of laboratories and registration of manufacturing facilities engaged in fastener
testing; and (3) requiring inspection, testing and certification, in accordance with standardized
methods, of fasteners covered by the Act.
This handbook describes the NIST requirements for registration of a fastener manufacturing
facility (a Facility) employing a fastener quality assurance system (QAS), as defined in the
regulations (the Regulations) and this handbook, by a Quality System Registrar
1 (a Registrar)
that in turn has been accredited by a NIST-recognized Accreditor.
It provides specific guidance
on the implementing regulations published at 15 CFR Part 280 “Procedures for Implementation
of the Fastener Quality Act”, Sec. 280.104 and Subparts I through L.
2
Registration applies only
to facilities that manufacture fasteners; raw material manufacturers must test the chemistry of
metals in a laboratory listed on the Accredited Laboratory List.
3
Manufacturers are required by regulation to comply with the requirements in the fastener
specification and standards, including sampling plans for final inspection and testing. However,
the Regulations also provide in Sec. 280.104 for an alternative to lot-by-lot final inspection and
testing recognizing current industry practices which rely on defect prevention employing quality
assurance systems.
Fastener Facilities which have registered quality systems may reduce the
number of tests performed in an accredited laboratory, provided the fastener specification or
standard recognizes the use of quality assurance systems. Some end-user fastener specifications
require registered QAS Facilities to use control plans to assure production of fasteners meeting
specification requirements. Under such circumstances, Facilities may be able to reduce their
reliance on final inspection and testing by controlling the process of production to limit and
control process variations which adversely affect the fastener produced. As confidence in the
process is obtained, the control plan may allow reduction of the number of verifications or the
number of fasteners from each lot required to be tested and inspected.
Therefore, an advantage
of the QAS Facility is to take account of such improvements in production by reducing the
testing requirements.
^ote: In some countries, the bodies which verify conformity of quality systems to specified standards are
called “certification bodies,” in others “registration bodies,” in others “assessment and registration bodies” or
“certification/registration bodies,” and in still others “registrars.” Reference to such bodies as “Registrars” should
not be understood to be limiting.
2 Section numbers denoted by “Sec.” or “Sec. 280.xxx” in this document reference the Regulations at 15
CFR Part 280.
^Facilities are advised to examine the requirements of Sections 3.0, Accreditation of Certain Manufacturing
Facilities as Laboratories, and 6.0, Sampling, in this handbook to determine when fastener testing must be
conducted by laboratories on the Accredited Laboratory List.
1

While in-process inspection may occur within registered Facilities, in most instances control
plans require verification of fastener characteristics by laboratory testing, such as
: tensile,
hardness, fatigue, metallographic analysis of grain, corrosion resistance, dimensional
conformance, etc. Such verifications must be performed by accredited laboratories.
Furthermore, specifications requiring final inspection and testing on finished fasteners must also
be performed in accredited laboratories. A Facility’s in-house laboratory which conducts
laboratory tests on fasteners required by the fastener specifications or standards or by control
plans used in conjunction with production of the fasteners must be accredited by a NIST-
recognized laboratory accreditation body. The laboratory accreditation is separate from the
Facility registration and may only be conducted by an Accredited Registrar if the Registrar’s
organization has also been recognized by NIST as a laboratory accreditation body.
To ensure the proper regulation of Facilities, NIST recognizes Accreditors that meet the
requirements of Subpart K of the Regulations (see NISTIR 6261), which is based upon ISO/IEC
Guide 61; the NIST-recognized Accreditors may in turn accredit Registrars that meet the
requirements of Subpart L of the Regulations (see NISTIR 6262), which is based upon ISO/IEC
Guide 62. The Registrars, in turn, may register Facilities that satisfy the elements of a Fastener
Quality Assurance System (QAS), as defined in the Regulations and this handbook.
Selected text from the Regulations is presented in italics in some sections of this handbook. For
full understanding of all requirements, interested parties are advised to read the Regulations in
their entirety.
In addition to the quality system registration requirements, many other important
issues are contained in that document. The Act and Regulations are accessible on the NIST FQA
Home Page (http://www.nist.gov/fqa).
NIST invites users to provide comments or suggestions for modifications, clarification or
improvement of this document. Comments should be addressed to Accreditation Body
Evaluation Program (ABEP) Program Manager, NIST, 100 Bureau Drive, Stop 2100,
Gaithersburg, MD 20899-2100.
1.1
Definitions
For the purposes of this handbook the following definitions are used. Those definitions
taken from the Act or Regulations are shown in italics.
1.1.1
Accreditation: A procedure by which a body recognized by NIST confirms that a
testing laboratory or a quality system registrar of fastener manufacturing facilities
that employ a Fastener Quality Assurance System is competent to carry out specific
tasks required by the implementing regulations for the Fastener Quality Act.
1.1.2
Accreditation Body Evaluation Program (ABEP): The program established by
NIST to receive applications and to evaluate Accreditors (of testing laboratories or
of quality system registrars) to determine if applicants meet applicable requirements
of the Act and regulations at
1 5 CFR Part 280. Based on the evaluation results,
2

ABEP makes recommendations to NIST regarding recognition of Accreditors.
1.1.3
Accredited Laboratory List: A list compiled and maintained by NIST of all
testing laboratories which have been accredited either by NIST or by any NIST-
recognized Accreditation Body in accordance with the requirements of The Act and
the Regulations.
1.1.4
Accredited Registrar: A quality systems registration body which is accredited by a
NIST recognized Accreditor and appears on the Registrars List.
1.1.5
Accreditor: A Registrar accreditation body or testing laboratory accreditation body
that is recognized by NIST, and appears on the Accreditors List.
1.1.6
Accreditors List: A list of all Accreditors that have been evaluated and recognized
by NIST in accordance with the requirements of the Act. Two Accreditors Lists are
maintained, one for testing laboratory accreditors and one for Registrar accreditors.
1.1.7
Act: The Fastener Quality Act, P.L. 101-592, as amended by P.L. 104-113.
1.1.8
Advanced Product Quality Planning: A structured process for developing and
implementing the methods of measurement and testing that will be used in
production of a specific product or family of products to meet requirements. Quality
planning incorporates both defect prevention and continuous improvement, rather
than defect detection. Proper implementation requires use of interdisciplinary teams
and systems to assure management of appropriate activities (e.g., product design
and development; development/finalization of special characteristics; product and
process validation; development and review of Control Plans; mistake proofing;
feedback, assessment and corrective action - continuous improvement) during
concept development through production. (See, for example. Advanced Product
Quality Planning and Control Plan QS-9000 reference manual.)
1.1.9
Approved Signatory: An individual employed by a facility registered under the
Act and these regulations who is recognized by a registrar as competent
to sign test
reports.
1.1.10
Authorized Representative: An employee of an organization with the authority to
make binding commitments on behalf of the organization. The authorized
representative is the person responsible for all communications between the Facility
and the Registrar or NIST and who will ensure that the Facility complies with all
Registrar and NIST program requirements.
1.1.11
Certificate of Registration: A document issued by a Registrar to a Facility that
has met the criteria and conditions of registration. The certificate, together with the
assigned code number and scope of registration issued by the Registrar, may be
used as proof of registration status.
3

1.1.12
Control Plans: Plans that describe the system controlling fastener products and
processes. They are written documents used by facilities to address the important
characteristics and engineering requirements of the fastener product. Each fastener
product shall have a Control Plan, but in many cases, “family” Control Plans can
cover a number of fastener products produced using a common process. The control
plan must be maintained throughout the fastener life cycle. Initially,
it is primarily
used to document and communicate the plan for process control. Later,
it guides
manufacturing in how to control the process and ensure fastener quality. Finally, the
control plan is continually updated as measurement systems and control methods
are evaluated and improved to reflect the current methods of control and
measurement systems used in production. (See, for example, Advanced Product
Quality Planning and Control Plan QS-9000 reference manual.)
1.1.13
Facilities List: A list compiled and maintained by NIST of all Facilities which have
been registered by accredited Registrars.
1.1.14
Facility: A fastener manufacturing facility or a facility performing subcontracted
processes for a manufacturing facility, that has been registered by an accredited
Registrar and that appears on the Facilities List.
1.1.15
Fastener: Fastener means any screw, nut, bolt or stud, washer or other item
included within the definitionforfastener contained in section 3(5) ofthe Fastener
Quality Act.
The term
‘fastener ” does not include a screw, nut, bolt or stud:
(1)
that is produced and marked as ASTMA307 Grade A,
(2)
that is produced in accordance with ASTM F432: or
(3)
that is held out as being produced to other than the provisions ofstandards and
specifications published by a consensus standards organization, or a government
agency.
A screw, nut, bolt, stud or washer held out as being produced according to
requirements ofa document other than a document published by a consensus
standards organization is afastener within the meaning ofthe Act and this part if
that document incorporates or references (directly or indirectly) standards and
specifications published by a consensus standards organization or government
agencyfor purposes ofdelineating performance or materials characteristics ofthe
fastener.
1.1.16
Fastener Quality Assurance System (QAS):
(1) Fastener Quality Assurance
System (QAS) means a fastener manufacturing system that has as a stated goal the
prevention ofdefects through continuous improvement, and which seeks to attain
that goal by incorporating:
(i) Advanced product quality planning;
(ii) Monitoring
and control ofthe manufacturing process; (Hi) Product verification activities
embodied in a comprehensive and written control plan to address critical or
significant product/process characteristics, documented process controls (including
statistical process control),
tests, and measurement systems to be used in
4

production; and (iv) The creation, maintenance, and retention ofelectronic,
photographic, or paper records, available for inspection during the periods
required by section 10 ofthe Act and Sec. 280.809 ofthe regulations, regarding the
inspections,
tests, and measurements required by or performedpursuant to the
control plan or other quality system documentation, e.g., work instructions. See
Section 4.0, Fastener Quality Assurance System Criteria, for amplification of
requirements.
1.1.17
Lot: A quantity offasteners ofone part numberfabricated by the same production
processfrom the same coil or heat number ofmetal as provided by the metal
manufacturer and submittedfor inspection and testing at one time.
1.1.18
Lot Number: A number assigned by a manufacturer to the lot.
1.1.19
Lot Traceability : The recording and maintenance oflot-specific identification
information sufficient to trace fastenersfrom a single lot throughout:
(1)
The manufacturer ’sfabrication or alteration process,
(2) All inspection and testing operations, and
(3)
The subsequent chain ofdistribution in commerce.
1 .1 .20
Original Laboratory Testing Reports: (1) In general, a laboratory testing report
which is originally signed by an approved signatory or is a copy thereof, certified
by the laboratory that conducted the test; or (2) For purposes ofthe alternative
proceduresfor chemical characteristics described in section 5 (d) ofthe Act and
Sec. 280. 15 ofthe regulations only, a laboratory testing report which is originally
signed by an approved signatory or is a copy thereof certified by the laboratory
that conducted the test or by the metal manufacturer.
1 .1 .21
Recognized Accreditor: An accreditor that is recognized by NIST and appears on
the Accreditors List.
1
. 1 .22
Registered Facility: A facility that is registered by an accredited registrar and
appears on the Facilities List.
1 .1 .23
Registrars List: A list compiled and maintained by NIST of all registrars which
have been accredited by NIST-recognized Accreditors.
1
. 1 .24
Registration: Procedure by which a body accredited by a NIST recognized
Accreditor gives written assurance that a manufacturing facility conforms to the
applicable requirements of a Fastener Quality Assurance System.
1
1 .25
Tamper-resistant system:
The use ofspecial paper or embossing stamps or other
controls which discourage, prevent or minimize alteration of test reports
subsequent to manufacturing, inspection and testing.
5

1
. 1 .26
Traceability of Measurements: A documented chain ofcomparisons connecting
the accuracy ofa measuring instrument to other measuring instruments ofhigher
accuracy and, ultimately, to a primary standard.
2.0 REQUESTING EVALUATION
2.1
Who May Apply
Fastener manufacturing facilities that desire to comply with the requirements of the Act and
regulation may apply to an accredited Registrar for registration as a QAS Facility under the
FQA. NIST will provide a list of accredited Registrars on the NIST FQA Home Page
(http://www.nist.gov/fqa.)
2.2
Listing Fee
A listing fee is paid by the Facility and forwarded to NIST by the accredited Registrar.
3.0 ACCREDITATION OF CERTAIN MANUFACTURING FACILITIES AS
LABORATORIES (Sec 280.104)
3.1
Subject to the limitations contained in paragraphs (3.3),
(3.4), and (3.5), registration of
a fastener manufacturing facility employing a fastener quality assurance system shall be
deemed to meet the requirements as an accredited laboratory for purposes of the Act.
The independent third-party Registrar registering such facility under this section shall
comply with all procedures set forth in Subparts I through L of the Regulation.
3.2
Records documenting the inspection and testing of a lot of fasteners performed by the
Facility shall be maintained in accordance with the requirements of sections 280.6,
280.808, and 280.809 of the regulation (see 5.0, Test Report and Record Requirements
for QAS Registered Facilities).
3.3
If a Facility accomplishes any in-process inspection and testing by performing
laboratory tests on a sample of fasteners at any stage in the manufacturing process,
those tests must be conducted by a laboratory on the Accredited Laboratory List. Such
a laboratory may be located on the same premises as the fastener manufacturing facility
if the laboratory is separately accredited under the laboratory accreditation provisions of
the regulation.
3.4 Any laboratory tests performed outside the Facility’s in-process inspection and testing
must be conducted by a laboratory on the Accredited Laboratory List.
3.5
Chemical and raw material testing must be performed by a laboratory on the Accredited
Laboratory List.
6

4.0
FASTENER QUALITY ASSURANCE SYSTEM CRITERIA
The Registrar’s audit team shall assess the quality assurance system employed at the
fastener manufacturing Facility against all applicable registration requirements
1
. The QAS
shall include, but is not limited to, the following elements in accordance with Sec. 280.2,
Fastener Quality Assurance System (QAS).
4.1
Quality Management System
The fastener manufacturing Facility shall have a documented QAS that satisfies the
requirements of ISO 9001 or ISO 9002, or other quality system standards that incorporate
ISO 9001 and ISO 9002 (e.g., QS-9000 series, AS9000, etc.). The quality assurance system
must have as a stated goal the prevention of defects through continuous improvement, and
seek to attain that goal by incorporating:
(i)
advanced product quality planning;
(ii)
monitoring and control of the manufacturing process;
(iii)
product verification activities embodied in a comprehensive and written control
plan: which addresses critical or significant product/process characteristics;
documents process controls (including statistical process control), tests, and
measurement systems to be used in production; and
(iv)
the creation, maintenance, and retention of electronic, photographic, or paper
records, available for inspection during the periods required by section
1 0 of the
Act and Sec. 280.809 of the regulations (See 5.0, of this handbook), regarding
the inspections, tests, and measurements required by or performed pursuant to
the control plan or other quality system documentation, e.g., work instructions.
4.2
Raw Material Traceability
The raw material certification supplied to the fastener manufacturer shall be traceable to that
of a mill heat of material that has been tested by a laboratory on the Accredited Laboratory
List.
4.3
Subcontractor Traceability
Any subcontracted processes, including plating and heat treating, shall be controlled by the
fastener manufacturer to avoid product lot contamination.
’NIST has determined that a fastener Facility registered for QS-9000 by a listed Registrar and meeting the
additional requirements in the regulations, as detailed in this handbook and verified by a Registrar through on-site
audit and registration, is eligible for listing as a Fastener Quality Assurance System Facility. QS-9000 Element
4.10.6, Supplier Laboratory Requirements, states that accreditation of a facility’s laboratory is not required by QS-
9000. However, the FQA requires use of accredited laboratories for both in-house testing as well as contracted
testing with commercial/independent laboratories. A Facility requesting registration to a standard, which is
equivalent to QS-9000, should contact a Registrar and make a formal request to initiate procedures for a
determination of equivalence by NIST.
7

4.3.1
These subcontracted processes shall be:
(i)
performed by a Facility on the Facilities List described in Sec. 280.810,
or
(ii)
tested by a laboratory on the Accredited Laboratory List described in
Sec. 280.101.
4.3.2
The finished lots of fasteners shall be traceable to subcontracted processes.
4.4
Quality Assurance Plan
4.4.1
The fastener manufacturer shall have a documented comprehensive control plan
which shall include:
(i)
a fully documented fastener sampling plan which includes sampling
frequency and sample size, and identification of inspection points in the
manufacturing process;
(ii)
an emphasis on defect prevention;
(iii)
corrective action for nonconforming characteristics,
(iv)
identification of the standards and specifications upon which the plan is
based.
4.4.2
The fastener manufacturer shall make the control plan available to the customer
upon request.
4.4.3
In the event that the standards or specifications to which a manufacturer
represents the fasteners in a particular sample to have been manufactured do not
provide for frequency and levels of inspection, and size and selection of the sample to
be inspected and tested, inspections and tests shall be carried out as noted in
Sec. 280.10.
(See 6.0, Sampling, of this handbook.)
4.4.4
The emphasis in the quality assurance plan shall be in-process controls or
defect prevention and continuous improvement, rather than defect detection at the end
of the production.
4.5
Quality Assurance Standards
4.5.1
The control plan shall include fastener characteristics:
(i)
specified by the sampling standard (e.g., ANSI/ASME B 1 8. 1 8.5M, 6M,
and 7M),
(ii)
specifically indicated by the applicable fastener standards and
specifications, and
(iii)
designated by the end user for evaluating product functionality.
8

5.0
TEST REPORT AND RECORD REQUIREMENTS FOR QAS REGISTERED
FACILITIES
5.1
Reports
Registered Facilities shall comply with requirements of Sec. 280.808 of the regulations,
the text of which follows:
Sec. 280.808 Reports.
Reports and records shall be maintained in such a manner to preserve original data, and
be collected as required into a finalform, sufficient to satisfy customer and legal
requirements.
Such reports shall be provided upon request to the Bureau ofExport
Administration, to the National Institute ofStandards and Technology, or to any other
agency of the federal government authorized to obtain such records under this part
1
.
5.2
Recordkeeping Requirements
Registered Facilities shall comply with requirements of Sec. 280.809 and Sec. 280.7 of
the regulations. The relevant sections are reprinted here for the convenience of the
reader.
Sec. 280.809 Recordkeeping.
Each ...fastener manufacturer whose Facility has been registered shall retain all
applicable records required under the Act and this partfor 5 years.
All records are
subject to the requirements in Sec. 280. 7 of this part.
Sec. 280. 7 Recordkeeping Requirement
(a)
Each laboratory accredited under Subparts C, D, or E or Facility registered under
Sec. 280. 104 ofthis part shall retain for 5 years after the performance ofa test all records
pertaining to that test concerning the inspection and testing, and certification, of
fasteners under the Act and this part.
The final test report or the test records maintained
by the laboratory shall contain sufficient information to permit the test to be repeated at
a later time ifa retest is necessary.
The laboratory shall maintain the test report and a
record ofall original observations, calculations, and derived data.
The records shall
include the identity ofpersonnel performing the testing.
Proceduresfor storage and
retrieval ofrecords must be documented and maintained in the laboratory's quality
manual.
1 Use of the term “part” in the regulations refers to 15 CFR Part 280, ‘‘Procedures for Implementation of
the Fastener Quality Act.”
9

(b)
Manufacturers, importers, private label distributors, andpersons
1 who significantly
alterfasteners shall retainfor 5 years after the performance ofa test all records
pertaining to that test concerning the inspection and testing, and certification, of
fasteners under the Act and these regulations.
(c)
Original records required.
Persons required to keep records under this part must
maintain the original records in the form in which that person receives or creates them
unless that person meets all ofthe conditions ofparagraph (d) ofthis section relating to
reproduction ofrecords. Original laboratory test reports described in sections 280.5,
280.6, 280.13, and 280.15(b) ofthis part must be kept.
(d)
Reproduction oforiginal records. A person required to keep records under this part
may maintain reproductions ofdocuments other than laboratory test reports instead of
the original records using any photographic, photostatic, miniature photographic,
micrographic, automated archival storage, or other process that completely, accurately,
legibly and durably reproduces the original records (whether on paper, microfilm, or
through electronic digital storage techniques).
The process must meet all ofthe
requirements ofparagraphs (d)(1) through (d)(9) ofthis section.
(1)
The system must be capable ofreproducing all records on paper.
(2)
The system must record and be able to reproduce all marks, information, and other
characteristics ofthe original record, including both obverse and reverse sides ofpaper
documents in legible form.
(3)
When displayed on a viewer, monitor, or reproduced on paper, the records must
exhibit a high degree oflegibility and readability.
(For purposes ofthis section, legible
and legibility mean the quality ofa letter or numeral that enable the observer to identify
it positively and quickly to the exclusion ofall other letters or numerals.
Readable and
readability mean the quality ofa group ofletters or numerals being recognized as
complete words or numbers.)
(4)
The system must preserve the initial image (including both obverse and reverse sides
ofpaper documents) and record all changes, who made them and when they were made.
This information must be stored in such a manner that none of it may be altered once it is
initially recorded.
(5)
The regulatedperson must establish written procedures to identify the individuals
who are responsible for the operation, use and maintenance ofthe system.
(6)
The regulatedperson must establish written proceduresfor inspection and quality
assurance ofrecords in the system and document the implementation ofthose procedures.
1 The Regulations define Persons as any individual, partnership, limitedpartnership or corporate entity
and/or a representative, agent or designee.
10

(7)
The system must he complete and contain all records required to be kept by this part
or the regulatedperson must provide a methodfor correlating, identifying and locating
records relating to the same transaction(s) that are kept in other record keeping systems.
(8)
The regulatedperson must keep a record ofwhere, when, by whom, and on what
equipment the records and other information were entered into the system.
(9) Upon request by the Bureau ofExport Administration or NIST, the regulatedperson
mustfurnish, at the examination site, the records, the equipment and, ifnecessary,
knowledgeable personnelfor locating, reading, and reproducing any record in the
system.
(e) Destruction or disposal ofrecords.
Ifthe Bureau ofExport Administration, NIST or
any other government agency makes aformal or informal requestfor any record or
records, such record or records may not be destroyed or disposed ofwithout the written
authorization ofthe agency concerned.
This prohibition applies even ifsuch records
have been retainedfor a period oftime exceeding that required by paragraph (a) or (b)
ofthis section.
(f) All persons required to keep records by this part mustfurnish those records when
requested to do so by an employee ofthe Bureau ofExport Administration or NIST
5.3
Test Reports (Sec. 280.6(b))
When performing tests for which they are registered under this part, each facility
registered under Subpart I or J ofthis Part and currently listed in the Facilities List shall
issue test reports of its work which accurately, clearly, and unambiguously present test
results, and all information required by this section.
In addition, the facilities shall
attach reports ofchemical characteristics and any report ofthe tests conducted in a
laboratory under the accredited laboratories list.
All reports must be in English or be
translated into English, must be signed by an approved signatory, must be protected by a
tamper resistant system, and contain the following information:
(1)
Name and address ofthe facility;
(2)
Unique identification ofthe test report, including date of issue and serial number,
or other appropriate means including references to control plan identification;
(3)
Name and address of client, ifapplicable;
(4)
Fastener description, including:
(i)
Manufacturer (name and address);
(ii)
Productfamily (screw, nut, bolt, washer, or stud), drive and/or head
configurations as applicable;
(Hi)
Date ofmanufacture;
11

(iv)
Head markings (describe or draw manufacturer's recorded insignia and
grade identification or property class symbols);
(v)
Nominal dimensions (diameter; length ofbolt, screw or stud; thickness of
load bearing washer); threadform and class offit;
(vi)
Product standards and specifications related to the facility in writing by
the manufacturer, importer or distributor;
(vii)
Lot number;
(viii)
Specification and gi
Aade ofmaterial;
(ix)
Coating material and standard and specification as applicable;
(5) Sampling information:
(i)
Standards and specifications or referencefor sampling scheme;
(ii)
Final manufacturing lot size;
(Hi)
Identification ofcontrol plan governing production ofthe lot to which the
test report is applicable;
(6)
Test Results:
(i)
Test results ofactual tests required by applicable fastener standards and
specifications, and characteristics designated by the end user;
(ii)
All deviationsfrom the test method;
(Hi)
All other items required on test reports according to the applicable
fastener standards and specifications, and characteristics designated by
the end user;
(iv)
Where the report contains results of tests performed by sub-contractors,
these results shall be clearly identified along with the name ofthe
laboratory/facility and accreditation/registration information listed in
paragraph (b)(9) ofthis section.
(v)
Where all processes under the applicable OAS werefound to be in
accordance with the inspections, tests and measurements required by the
standards and specifications and the OAS and characteristics designated
by the end user, a statement that the samples tested conform to the
applicablefastener standards and specifications;
(vi)
Where any process under the applicable OAS wasfound not to be in
accordance with the inspections,
tests, or measurements required by such
OAS, a statement that the samples tested do not conform to the applicable
fastener standards and specifications and identification ofany
nonconformance;
(7)
A statement that the report must not be reproduced except in full;
(8)
Name,
title and signature ofapproved signatory accepting technical responsibility
for the tests and test report;
(9)
The name ofthe registrar which registered the facility, and code number assigned
to the facility by the registrar, and the expiration ofregistration (if applicable).
12

6.0
SAMPLING (Sec. 280.10)
(a) For tests conducted either in a Registered or non-Registered Facility, if a manufacturer
represents that the fasteners in a particular sample have been manufactured to a standard or
specification which provides for the size, selection or integrity of the sample to be inspected and
tested, the sample shall be determined in accordance with that standard or specification.
(b) For tests conducted by a non-Registered Facility in a laboratory on the Accredited Laboratory
List, if a manufacturer represents that the fasteners in a particular sample have been
manufactured to a standard or specification which does not provide for the size, selection or
integrity of the sample to be inspected and tested, the sample shall be determined in accordance
with the sampling plan provided by ASME/ANSI B18.18.2M, Inspection and Quality Assurance
For High-Volume Machine Assembly Fasteners; ASME/ANSI B18.18.3M, Inspection and
Quality Assurance for Special Purpose Fasteners; or ASME/ANSI B18.18.4M, Inspection and
Quality Assurance for Highly Specialized Engineering Applications-Fasteners.
(c) For tests conducted in a Registered Facility, if a manufacturer represents that the fasteners in
a particular sample have been manufactured to a standard or specification which does not provide
for the size, selection or integrity of the sample to be inspected and tested, the sample for
inspections and tests by the Facility shall be determined by the sampling plan provided by its
Fastener Quality Assurance System or by standards and specifications intended for use with a
Fastener Quality Assurance System, as appropriate.
Or, a manufacturer operating a Registered
Facility may elect to conduct inspections and tests upon all of the fasteners within a specified lot,
provided that this election is documented in the control plan of its Fastener Quality Assurance
System.
7.0
SUBCONTRACTING (Sec. 280.807)
If a
... registered Facility subcontracts any of its functions to another entity it must place the
work with another
... registered Facility; inform the client, before the fact, that subcontracting
will be necessary, and clearly indicate in all appropriate records, and reports to the client,
specifically whatfunctions were subcontracted.
Quality' documentation shall include
procedures for subcontracting even if subcontracting is not a normal practice.
8.0
MAINTAINING RECOGNIZED STATUS (Sec. 280.804)
8.1
NIST Surveillance/Observer Status
NIST has the right to participate as an observer during any on-site visit to a Facility being
audited by an Accredited Registrar, or it may perform its own surveillance visit of a
Facility at its discretion.
13

8.2
Proper Use of Registration Status and Claims
A Facility registered under the Act and regulations shall take no action which states or
implies the approval, or endorsement by NIST or any other agency of the U.S. Federal
Government of any product or report pertaining to a product associated with any
activities carried out under the registration. No Facility may take any action which states
or implies that it is registered or authorized by NIST to act or perform in any area(s)
beyond that which was specified in the registration documents.
14

BIBLIOGRAPHY
The Fastener Quality Act (Pub. L. 101-592, as amended by Pub. L. 104-113).
Procedures for Implementation of the Fastener Quality Act; 15 CFR Part 280.
ISO/IEC Guide 2:1996, Standardization and related activities—General vocabulary.
ISO/IEC Guide 61
: 1996, General requirementsfor assessment and accreditation of
certification/registration bodies.
ISO/IEC Guide 62:1996, General requirementsfor bodies operating assessment and
certification/registration ofquality systems.
ISO 8402:1994, Quality management and quality assurance— Vocabulary.
ISO 9001
: 1994, Quality systems—Modelfor quality assurance in design, development,
production, installation, and servicing.
ISO 9002:1994, Quality systems—Modelfor quality assurance in production, installation, and
servicing.
ISO 1001 1-1
: 1990, Guidelinesfor auditing quality systems—Part 1: Auditing.
ISO 1001 1-2:1991, Guidelinesfor auditing quality systems—Part 2: Qualification criteriafor
quality systems auditors.
ISO 1001 1-3:1991, Guidelinesfor auditing quality systems—Part 3: Management of audit
programmes.
ISO 10013:1995, Guidelinesfor developing quality manuals.
QS-9000, Quality System Requirements , Third edition, March 1998, Chrysler Corporation, Ford Motor
Company, General Motors Corporation-Automotive Industry Action Group.
Advanced Product Quality Planning (APOP) and Control Plan Reference Manual, June 1994, Chrysler
Corporation, Ford Motor Company, General Motors Corporation-Automotive Industry Action Group.
Statistical Process Control (SPC) Reference Manual , 1992, Chrysler Corporation, Ford Motor
Company, General Motors Corporation-Automotive Industry Action Group.
15

Stiefel, S. Wayne and Gladhill, Robert L., Proceduresfor Obtaining NIST Recognition as an
Accreditor ofQuality System Registrars Under the Fastener Quality Act, NISTIR 6161, December
1998.
Stiefel, S. Wayne and Gladhill, Robert L., Accreditation Requirementsfor Quality System Registrars
Under Provisions ofthe Fastener Quality Act, NISTIR 6262, December 1998.
16