NISTIR 8127 
End-to-End Quality Information 
Framework (QIF) Technology Survey 
John Michaloski 
Tom Hedberg 
Hui Huang 
Thomas Kramer 
This publication is available free of charge from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8127 
April 2016

NISTIR 8127 
 
 
End-to-End Quality Information 
Framework (QIF) Technology Survey 
 
 
John Michaloski 
Tom Hedberg 
Hui Huang 
Thomas Kramer 
Engineering Laboratory (EL) 
 
This publication is available free of charge from: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.6028/NIST.IR.8127 
 
 
 
April 2016  
 
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. Department of Commerce 
Penny Pritzker,  Secretary 
National Institute of Standards and Technology  
Willie May, Under Secretary of Commerce for Standards and Technology and Director

i 
 
Table of Contents 
Notation ........................................................................................................................................................ 1 
Background ................................................................................................................................................... 1 
Product Lifecycle Background ....................................................................................................................... 2 
Metrology Issues ........................................................................................................................................... 5 
Measurement Uncertainty........................................................................................................................ 5 
Assigning Tolerances ................................................................................................................................. 6 
Lossless Data Exchange and Preventing Digital Tolerance Stack Up ........................................................ 9 
Product Quality ........................................................................................................................................... 10 
Inspection Product Cycle ........................................................................................................................ 12 
Quality Design ......................................................................................................................................... 14 
Quality Planning ...................................................................................................................................... 14 
Quality Results ........................................................................................................................................ 16 
Quality Analysis ....................................................................................................................................... 16 
Quality Information Framework (QIF) ........................................................................................................ 19 
QIF Software Development ......................................................................................................................... 21 
QIF Enterprise Integration ...................................................................................................................... 24 
Summary ..................................................................................................................................................... 24 
Disclaimer.................................................................................................................................................... 25 
References .................................................................................................................................................. 25

ii 
 
 
Table of Figures 
Figure 1 Product Lifecycle Steps ................................................................................................................... 3 
Figure 2 Manufacturing Activity in Product Lifecycle ................................................................................... 3 
Figure 3 Ishikawa Cause Effect on Measurement Uncertainty ..................................................................... 6 
Figure 4 Tolerance Analysis ( [18] Used with Permission) ............................................................................ 7 
Figure 5 Activities and relations within CLTE [19] (Used with Permission) . ................................................ 8 
Figure 6 Digital Tolerance Stack Up ............................................................................................................ 10 
Figure 7 Dimension and Shape characteristics ........................................................................................... 11 
Figure 8 Bolt pattern ................................................................................................................................... 11 
Figure 9a Example Block with Hole GD&T Symbols .................................................................................... 12 
Figure 10 Manufacturing Phases of Inspection .......................................................................................... 13 
Figure 11 Inspection Planning ..................................................................................................................... 15 
Figure 12 Quality Analysis and Feedback .................................................................................................... 18 
Figure 13 QIF 2 ‘Life Saver’ Architecture .................................................................................................... 20 
Figure 14 QIF XML Solution Space .............................................................................................................. 23

1 
 
Notation 
ANSI 
American National Standards Institute 
CAD  
Computer-Aided Design  
CAM  
Computer-Aided Manufacturing  
CAPP 
Computer-Aided Process Planning  
CAQ 
Computer-Aided Quality  
CIM 
Computer Integrated Manufacturing  
DOM 
Document Object Model 
FAIR 
First Article Inspection Report 
FEA 
Finite Element Analysis 
GD&T 
Geometric Dimensioning and Tolerancing 
IMTS 
International Manufacturing Technology Show 
MBD  
Model-Based Design 
NIST 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
PDF 
Portable Document Format 
PLM 
Product Lifecycle Management 
PMI  
Product and Manufacturing Information 
STEP 
Standard for the Exchange of Product model data 
QIF 
Quality Information Framework 
SME 
Society of Manufacturing Engineers 
XML 
Extensible Markup Language 
XSD 
XML Schema 
Background 
Quality of a product may be defined as “its ability to fulfill the customer's needs and expectations” [1]. 
Quality is defined in terms of performance requirements, which vary from product to product. For discrete 
parts, the primary performance requirements, commonly referred to as characteristics, are with respect 
to dimension (e.g., length, diameter, thickness, or area), geometry (e.g., flatness, cylindricity, etc.), and 
appearance (e.g., surface finish, color, or texture). To ensure overall quality, delivered parts must meet 
the required quality characteristics. Thus, part quality is measured by its conformance to the performance 
requirements. 
Intuition, “rules of thumb”, and educated guesses are ineffective ways to guarantee part quality. Quality 
goods can only be manufactured using hard knowledge derived from superior part design, part 
fabrication, and ongoing and continuous collection and evaluation of production data. Of interest in our 
work is the use of quality standards, and especially feedback through quality standards, to improve part 
design and fabrication as a consequence of the quality reporting of products. 
Manufacturing systems are by their nature imperfect. Process variability can hinder manufacturers in their 
effort to maintain acceptable part quality. However, inadequate control of process variability can lead to 
scrap, rework, and repair. Maintaining close control of production quality requires measurement and 
adjustment to design and manufacturing process errors. Inspection is used to provide insight and visibility 
to potential production problems so that they can be rectified in a timely manner. Inspection is an integral 
part of manufacturing activities since it measures quality. Inspection planning determines where, when,

2 
 
and how characteristics of a product are to be inspected. With the continued growth of product 
complexity and variety and the constant demand of reducing the product development cycle, industries 
are in search of more automated measurement operations, and integrated measurement knowledge. To 
assess quality, an actual, machined part is measured and geometric dimensioning and tolerancing (GD&T) 
characteristics are assessed by comparing the designed (commonly referred to as “nominal”) values and 
their actual values. Good parts maintain a fit and form within the specified GD&T tolerance limits. 
Tolerancing is widely used in industry to define the allowable variation of discrete parts from their ideal 
shape. 
The goal of this paper is to understand how quality information characterizing the manufactured parts 
can be reported in a Extensible Markup Language (XML) standardized format. The Quality Information 
Framework (QIF) is an American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard sponsored by the 
Dimensional Metrology Standards Consortium (DMSC) that defines an integrated set of XML information 
models to enable the effective exchange of metrology data throughout the entire manufacturing quality 
measurement process – from product design to inspection planning to execution to analysis and 
reporting. The desire is that QIF will help foster a pervasive “digital thread” throughout the product 
lifecycle contributing to feedforward and feedback flow of quality information. The hope is that 
widespread adoption of QIF will lead to better and more optimized part design and manufacturing 
processes performance.   
Product Lifecycle Background 
The widespread use of computers and the pervasive networking of information have revolutionized 
manufacturing. The advantage of these technologies is that manufacturers now have the opportunity for 
end-to-end dissemination and accumulation of digital information. Yet, although the field of 
manufacturing is constantly improving and adopting innovative techniques, the transition to a completely 
digital enterprise is still only partially complete. The hope is that formal standards for digital 
representation throughout the enterprise will allow feedback and feedforward of manufacturing and 
product information throughout the enterprise. These digital standards must be well-understood, 
transcend the manufacturing domain into mainstream computer technology, yet at the same time have 
industry-wide focus and acceptance or the potential benefits are lost. 
Product development is a complex process involving the integration of distributed resources, such as 
human beings, engineering tools, software systems, and a large variety of product-related machines. 
Figure 1 shows the basic sequential steps in the product lifecycle with no feedback consideration. Stark 
defines Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) as the business activity of managing, in the most effective 
way, a company’s products all the way across their lifecycles; from the very first idea for a product all the 
way through until it's retired and disposed [2].

3 
 
 
Figure 1 Product Lifecycle Steps 
Of interest to this paper, is the product lifecycle that focuses on the “art to part” fabrication and assembly 
of a final sellable good. Figure 2 shows a high-level abstract view of the manufacturing activity product 
lifecycle. As such, we will focus on the product realization process, which is concerned with the design, 
fabrication, assembly, and inspection of the final product. More specifically the digital thread will be 
studied as both an upstream and downstream link to impart production information.  
 
 
Figure 2 Manufacturing Activity in Product Lifecycle 
Customer
Requirements
Product
Design
Prototyping
Testing
Process
Planning
Production
Delivery
Service
Removal
Disposal
Model
Tolerances
Analysis
Fabrication
Planning
Inspection 
Planning
Process
Planning
Idea
Design
Manufacturing Planning
Solid Model
Fabrication
 Assembly
Inspection
Product
Manufacturing
Process Plan
Data
Inventory
Reporting
Requirements
Cost
Simulation
Elec/Mech
Facility
Layout
Supply
Chain

4 
 
Product design spans an initial idea, model, refinement, and design, which requires cooperation of 
multidisciplinary design teams and the access to various engineering tools, such as computer aided design 
(CAD), finite element analysis (FEA), dynamic and kinematics analysis, simulation, and optimization 
packages, and databases. 
Product manufacturing covers fabrication, machining, inspection and assembly. Production requires 
machines, transfer mechanisms, and supervisory control. Product engineering requires collaborative 
multidisciplinary engineering, including: computer integrated manufacturing (CIM), computer- aided 
manufacturing (CAM), computer-aided process planning (CAPP), computer-aided quality (CAQ), 
computer-aided inspection planning (CAIP), etc. 
Product development has historically been a highly sequential activity where manufacturing was 
disconnected from engineering activities. Globalization and the rapid evolving of network tools, such as 
the Internet and web-based technologies, have revolutionized the product development process. 
Collaboration takes on a further importance if the manufacturing is geographically performed in different 
locations. Collaboration is possible throughout the entire product lifecycle by using lossless feedforward 
and feedback collaboration, but warrants a bi-directional digital thread. 
The ability to collaborate by sharing product design and product data as well as manufacturing data among 
authorized users is now possible. With connectivity, the effective collaboration among designer, suppliers, 
and manufacturers throughout the entire product lifecycle is becoming much more important for 
continued competitiveness. The environment should not only automate individual tasks in the manner of 
traditional computer-aided engineering tools, but also mediate between individual tasks to promote 
collaboration within the context of a product design project [3]. In collaborative manufacturing, product 
lifecycle management (PLM) is recognized as a strategic business model to support collaborative creation, 
management, dissemination, and use of product assets, including data, information, knowledge, etc., 
across the extended enterprise from concept to end of life—integrating people, processes, and 
technology [4].  
To date, two-dimensional (2D)  product information has seen its capabilities far exceeded by three-
dimensional modeling and analysis systems, yet 2D drawings still retain a dominant role as contracting 
documentation. However, the emphasis on product information has moved drawings from 2D hard copy 
support to three dimensional (3D) digital form. Product and manufacturing information (PMI) facilitates a 
thorough 3D annotation environment that allows the association of geometrical tolerance directly to the 
3D model.  Given this 3D digital thread world, manufacturing is primed to automate the connectivity from 
design to shop floor, especially the role of quality feedback in improving the design, fabrication, and 
assembly of parts. The benefits and issues of PMI and the product lifecycle with a standardized digital 
thread with PMI have been studied, but are not yet a prevalent practice [5] [6] [7] [8]. 
This document will give a background on product life cycle with an emphasis on the role of quality, 
introduce QIF as an XML standard representation and exchange format for part quality information, and 
then discuss the opportunities that QIF can play in a 3D digital thread world. The goal of this document is

5 
 
to use digital thread concepts in manufacturing for the incorporation of the QIF in the product lifecycle. 
Without doubt, quality is an important consideration, as QIF offers the following potential benefits: 
1. Real-time manufacturing and especially quality data integrated into the design phase of the 
product lifecycle, 
2. Lossless data feedforward from the design phase into the production quality phase. 
Metrology Issues 
As background, there are numerous terms used in metrology as applied to inspection measurement 
systems and measurement results. Accuracy, precision, trueness, bias, error, variability, tolerance, 
traceability, reliability, and uncertainty are each integral to understanding metrology concepts. We will 
present definitions to define the metrology concepts [9] since the terminology is confusing. These terms 
(particularly accuracy and traceability) are very often confused (and abused) in practice due to difference 
in meaning to the seller, buyer, and user of metrology instruments [10].  
Any given measurement result is usually taken as the estimate [11].  No measurement is exact. Trueness 
is the closeness of a measurement result to the actual (true) value.  Error is the difference between a 
measured value of quantity and its true value. Variability is an inherent part of measurement systems and 
measurements – no two measurements can be expected to be the same. There are two types of 
measurement error: systematic error and random error. Measurement bias is the systematic error that is 
associated with the fact that a measured value contains a consistent error. A random error is caused by 
inherently unpredictable fluctuations with the measurement device and when a measurement is repeated 
it will generally provide a measured value that is different from the previous value.  
In metrology, measurement uncertainty characterizes the dispersion of measured values to the true value. 
The accuracy of a measurement system is the degree of closeness of measurements of a quantity to the 
true value. Precision is the closeness of agreement among a set of measurement results. Precision can 
also be defined with reference to a measurement number of decimal places. Clearly, representing a 
measurement with a millionth decimal place versus a tenth decimal place provides a more exacting result, 
but there is no guarantee that extra decimal places add accuracy.   
Ideally a measurement device is both accurate and precise, with measurements all close to and tightly 
clustered around the true value. The accuracy and precision of a measurement process is usually 
established by repeatedly measuring some traceable reference standard. Traceability to a widely accepted 
standard permits comparisons of measurements among users. Reliability refers to the consistency of 
accurate results over consecutive measurements over time [12]. 
Measurement Uncertainty 
Decision rules for proving conformance or non-conformance with specifications are clearly defined by 
international standards. A component dimension must be accompanied by a tolerance [13] giving a lower 
specification limit (LSL) and an upper specification limit (USL), while a measurement result must be 
accompanied by an estimate of measurement uncertainty (U) [14].

6 
 
Accuracy, properly defined as measurement uncertainty [14], is a key performance indicator for 
metrology. The accuracy of the required measurement resources are key determinant factors for the 
selection of inspection methods and technologies. There is a very wide spectrum of physical scale and 
accuracy requirements for which inspection resources need to be selected, ranging from measurement of 
small parts to large, complex products. Regardless of the scale, the dimensional measurement results 
need to be accompanied by the statement of uncertainty as defined by “Guide to the Expression of 
Uncertainty in Measurement” (GUM) [14]. 
Process inspection is dictated by the capability of the process and inspection systems. The level of 
inspection effort is dictated by the risk of Type I or Type II errors. Depending on the industry sector, such 
risk is driven by performance, safety, and fit. The result of any measurement contains errors which 
contribute to the overall value of measurement uncertainty as shown in Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3 Ishikawa Cause Effect on Measurement Uncertainty 
The standard ISO 14253 [15] makes it clear that the onus is on the supplier of the measurement data to 
guarantee the conformance to specification (tolerance) of the measurements, and that the data takes 
account of measurement uncertainty [16]. 
Assigning Tolerances 
Variability, uncertainty, and tolerance have to be considered within product design to assure the required 
cost, performance, quality, and reliability.  Tolerance is the allowable variance from the true dimension of 
a part. The importance of assigning product tolerances effects both cost and performance.  
There is a well-known adage that states “Overtolerancing costs you money.” On one hand, tight tolerances 
help assure satisfaction of the required specifications, but are more costly because the manufacturing 
process must be more precise, thus require more expensive manufacturing methods, more costly process, 
more steps, or more accurate fabrication machinery. On the other hand, loose tolerances may be cost-
Logical
Human Caused
Mechanical
Measurement
Uncertainty
Environmental
Methodological
Numerical
Rounding
Error
Weak inspection
Process planning
Unnecessary 
realignments
Dust
Light
Temperature
Repeated
Clamping
Geometrical
formulas
Errors in
Holding
Measurement
tools
Inconsistency of
Forces while
clamping
Compensation
Errors
Uncertainty in
Measuring probes
Tool and jig
inaccuracy
Actuation
uncertainty
Humidity
Numerical Stability
 Translation
Errors
Excessive
Probing
 Translation
Errors

7 
 
effective, but can lead to higher failure probability during manufacturing (e.g., scrap, rework) or 
breakdown during use.  
Tighter tolerances not only contribute to cost, but add complexity which may make producibility more 
difficult. Milner et al. pointed out that “Customer requirements and overly conservative, and in some cases 
required, design margins tend to drive complexity into high-reliability systems which can adversely impact 
producibility by driving higher costs, longer manufacturing cycle times, and poor yields once the design is 
transitioned into production” [17]. 
Computer aided tolerancing can provide a simulation platform for modeling the effects of tolerance 
setting within a manufacturing process or assembly. Generally, tolerance analysis uses the worst-case 
maximum of dimensions and tolerances to calculate the maximum and minimum distance (clearance or 
interference) between two features or parts. Statistical tolerance analysis evaluates the maximum and 
minimum values based on some method for establishing the likelihood of obtaining the maximum and 
minimum values. 
 
Figure 4 Tolerance Analysis ( [18] Used with Permission) 
Tolerance-cost-optimization maximizes the product specifications tolerance while meeting an acceptable 
failure probability thus minimizing cost. Tolerance optimization during design has a positive impact on the 
production yields; with better yields reducing product cost and improving product quality. Tolerance-cost-
optimization uses either tolerance stackup analysis or a statistical tolerance analysis to compute the best 
tolerances. 
When products fail to meet expectations, designers need to understand why the assigned tolerances 
failed to yield the exact part and assembly dimensions expected from manufacturing. Designers can then 
compensate for these errors in the next version of the product.  
Discerning the reason for bad parts can be improved within a digital thread manufacturing environment 
through the use of quality feedback to help understand the manufacturing processes and product form 
and fit issues. It would be better yet, if advice were automated to show the designer explicit flaws and 
suggest potential improvements to the product.  
Krogstie and Martinsen introduce Closed Loop Tolerance Engineering (CLTE) as a model that understands 
how actors, tools, and communication flow in collaborative design between the different main activities 
Tolerance Analysis Methods
Basic approaches
• 
Worst case criterion or methods of 
extremes
• 
Root sum square (RSS) criterion or 
sample statistical method
Advanced aproaches
• 
Based on complexities in process 
distribution
• 
Based on complexities in assembly 
response function

8 
 
in product development [19]. The CLTE model has its origin in a survey within both the design and 
manufacturing units of a manufacturing company. The CLTE model has the following activities: 
• 
Functional Requirements –The definition of the product to satisfy the customer, including the 
definition of acceptance limits for function and a rough selection of technical concepts. 
• 
Tolerancing - All activities that lead to the definition of “limits of specifications” of product or 
process related parameters. 
• 
Process Capabilities - The manufacturing processes to produce the product as specified. 
• 
Product Performance - The validation of the functional behavior of the product through physical 
testing or simulation. 
Given this model feedforward and feedback relationships are developed to associate the various elements 
in product development to tolerance engineering. Figure 5 shows the feedforward and feedback 
relationships within the CLTE model. 
 
Figure 5 Activities and relations within CLTE [19] (Used with Permission) . 
Merging the tolerancing language (GD&T) with variation insight can lead to better tolerance analysis and 
more robust products. But tolerances, variation, and robustness are drawing from different sources of 
knowledge and require collaboration to share pertinent tolerance information. Figure 5 shows the 
relationships that form the basis of information distribution between activities.  In the CLTE relationship 
diagram, actors can be designers, project leaders, management, manufacturing operators, test engineers, 
process engineers, foremen, etc. Tools and practices support the actors in making appropriate decisions 
when working with the four main activities. The lack of tools or wrong application of them can, in the 
same way, lead to inappropriate decisions. Table 1 presents the activities involved in the differing CLTE 
relationships. Of importance to the digital thread, is the automation of quality information flow in a CLTE 
model.  As a first automation attempt at CLTE, the feedback relations pointing to the left in the CLTE model 
could be automated using QIF XML to allow reuse of existing tolerance knowledge. 
Functional
Requirements
Tolerancing
Process
Capabilities
Product
Performance
1a
1b
2a
2b
3a
3b
4a
5a
6a
4b
5b
6b

9 
 
Table 1 CLTE Relationship Activities [19] 
Relation 
Activities 
1a 
How are functional requirements transformed into specifications? Which actors translate such 
requirements?  
1b  
Given existing limits of specifications: How are the assumptions for the tolerances stored for 
following projects? 
2a  
For each single parameter in a product or process: How well do the specifications fit the capability 
of the process? 
2b  
For each single parameter in a product or process: Are the critical parameters identified? Does 
capability data exist? 
3a  
Are the critical parameters for product performance known? How are the capability data for these 
satisfactory? 
3b  
Are sources of variation in product performance understood? Is knowledge gained in test 
departments looped back? 
4a  
Do functional requirements lead to a pre-definition of the manufacturing process? Is the 
parameter possible to manufacture? 
4b  
Can critical and less critical parameters be distinguished? Does capability data exist for 
critical parameters? 
5a  
For a given product or process: Are the key parameters (and their variation) influencing the 
product performance known? 
5b 
 For a given product or process: Can variation in product performance be traced back to 
variation in key parameters? 
6a  
Can the chosen functional requirements be met by corresponding product performance? 
6b  
To what extent is existing knowledge from testing, simulation, and manufacturing relevant 
for following projects? 
 
The relationship and questions posed by the CLTE model form a basis for understanding the role of quality 
in the feedback and feedforward of production knowledge represented by the manufacturing digital 
thread. 
Lossless Data Exchange and Preventing Digital Tolerance Stack Up 
In a complete digital thread, all transfer of information is done through the use of “lossless” digital 
representation. Generally, lossless data exchange refers to compression techniques (such as Joint 
Photographic Experts Group (JPEG), or Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG)) but in this case refers to 
the exchange of information from one stage in the product lifecycle to another. It may be preferable from 
the perspective of the Standard for the Exchange of Product model data (STEP) to use the STEP standard 
all the time for content as well as any translation. In theory, using the same representation will not result 
in any loss of information (or injection of errors).  
Translation from one design language into another imparts variability into the design due to 
heterogeneous mapping of one representation into another. If the language translations imparted zero 
variability, the information would be identical; however, this is not usually the case. Digital tolerance 
stackup refers to the loss of precision in translating from one representation language to another (CAD-
>STEP->QIF) and the requirement to increase the tolerance of the part design to compensate for the loss 
of precision.

10 
 
For example, a translated part must maintain a given tolerance of +/- 0.05, so it must decrease its 
tolerance zone to +/- 0.04 to accommodate the potential imprecision of 0.01 due to the translation from 
language A to language B. Thus, an acceptable translation from CAD into STEP may allow a +/-0.01 
allowance around a box, which when stacked up with the translation of STEP into QIF means another loss 
of +/-0.01. In order for the part to maintain a manufacturability of +/- 0.05, it has to decrease the tolerance 
of the original part to +/- 0.04 and then to +/-0.03 to accommodate the loss of accuracy. Stacking two 
translations means a loss of +/- 0.01 for each translation and a loss of +/- 0.02 precision total, which 
corresponds to a decrease in tolerance of +/- 0.01 for each translation. So the effect is a decrease in 
tolerance (which costs money) for each loss of precision for each translation. 
 
 
Figure 6 Digital Tolerance Stack Up 
There has been much activity in developing manufacturing open standards: STEP [20], JTOpen [21], and 
QIF [22].  Despite all the effort in open standards, adoption has been slow. One of the major reasons for 
this is that meaning is often lost in data translation. Correct implementation of authoring systems and 
translators using product PMI associated with a CAD model such as geometric tolerances, dimensional 
tolerances, and datum features is essential for broader industry adoption of open standards. Lipman and 
Lubell discuss an approach used at NIST for checking the conformance of STEP files to the recommended 
practice for PMI representation [23].  Until CAD and PMI can guarantee a lossless translation between 
proprietary and neutral standard representations, manufacturers will be reluctant to attempt this action. 
Product Quality  
Quality needs to be initially defined in terms of characteristics, which vary from product to product. To 
ensure overall quality, delivered products must adhere to quality characteristics. Product quality is 
measured by its conformance to the design requirements including dimension, tolerance, and surface 
finish. The selection of a manufacturing process to produce a quality part depends on many constituent 
factors (machine tools, cutting tools, fixtures, process plan) and is greatly based on cost and process 
capabilities. Thus for example, the ability to produce a part depends on the machining of parts that adhere 
to given tolerances. Missing part tolerances are harmful as both cost and quality suffer. Clearly, no 
manufacturing process can make a perfect part, such that, designers must specify the acceptable 
variations to determine whether an actual part is a “good” part.  
Today, symbols to represent GD&T information on a part drawing have been standardized under different 
organizations, including ISO [24], as well as the ANSI Y14.5 [25] The standard GD&T symbols provide a 
+/- .05
+/- 0.05  
+/- 0 .01

11 
 
means for specifying the shape requirements of, and the interrelationships between, part features. GD&T 
defines the nominal, as-modeled, or as-intended geometry. In GD&T, a datum is a theoretically exact 
point, axis, or plane and serves as the origin from which the tolerance characteristics of features of a part 
are established. GD&T specifications define the allowable datum variation by assigning tolerances, which 
are generally categorized into geometrical and dimensional tolerances. Geometrical tolerances are used 
to control the form, profile, orientation, location and runout of features. Dimensional tolerances are used 
to control the size and location of a feature referring to the datum. Form tolerances are applicable to 
single (individual) features or elements of a single feature; therefore, form tolerances are not related to 
datum. Form tolerance is a subset of geometric tolerances. It includes straightness, flatness, circularity, 
and cylindricity. This type of tolerance can be used for two distinctly different controls: surface control 
and control of derived median planes or derived median lines.  
 
Figure 7 Dimension and Shape characteristics 
 Since drilling holes constitutes anywhere from 60 % to 80 % of machining operations, 
we will use a bolt pattern shown in Figure 8 as an example to explain the various 
interrelated modeling GD&T elements. In three dimensions, holes are represented by 
cylindrical features typically contained within a block. Figure 9a shows a rectangular 
part with a hole at (10,5) from the part origin (left hand bottom corner), and a 0.05 
cylindricity 
 specification defining the hole tolerance. The adjoining Figure 9b 
shows that this means that there is a tolerance zone for the cylindrical axis, and that 
three (3) circles generated from measuring points on the top/mid/bottom circles within the cylinder and 
the line generated from fitting these centers must be within 0.05 mm of the actual center line. 
Surface
Texture
Geometric
characteristic
Dimensional
characteristic
Linear
Angular
Orientation
Location
Form
Roughness
Waviness
Characteristic
Figure 8 Bolt pattern

12 
 
 
Figure 9a Example Block with Hole GD&T Symbols 
Figure 9b Cylindricity Tolerance fitting 
 
Inspection Product Cycle 
Given this example, there are multiple phases of inspection. Figure 10 gives a brief overview of the main 
information modeling aspects of quality and the relationship to manufacturing processes (part design and 
tolerancing, inspection planning, inspection, analysis, and reporting.) 
0.05
 
C
A
B

13 
 
 
Figure 10 Manufacturing Phases of Inspection 
DESIGN. In the Design phase, a characteristic (e.g., cylindricity tolerance) can be associated to one or more 
part features (i.e., the hole). In our terminology, a part means the part design, and a physical instance of 
a part is called an actual component. 
PLAN. Once the feature and characteristic are developed, a Plan can be undertaken to assign nominal 
measurement points for the inspection device to probe. These nominal measurement points are assigned 
to the Feature Nominal, as defined in Figure 10 as the Point2Measure box. 
INSPECT. Now an inspection can be done. Inspection using a measurement device produces data for the 
Measurement Points box which contains the probe readings corresponding to the nominal point lists. This 
Measurement Points could be generated by a simulation in the case that validation of tolerance planning 
and analysis is desired. 
ANALYZE. An Inspection is performed and a set of points are recorded (MeasuredPoints in Figure 10). The 
recorded inspection points are contained in the Feature Actual measured data point set. Given the 
measured points, the part can be compared to the GD&T specification to determine the goodness of the 
part. 
Today, symbols to represent GD&T tolerances on a part drawing have been standardized by different 
standards organizations. The standard GD&T symbols provide a means for specifying the shape 
requirements of, and the interrelationships between, part features. Although automated inspection using 
GD&T technology has become commonplace, the solutions for the planning, programming, and reporting 
Feature(s)
Characteristic
1,,n
Plan
Points2Measure
1,,n
Inspect
Measured 
Points
1to1mapping
Analyze
Feature(s)
Characteristic
1,,n
Points2Measure
1,,n
Feature(s)
Characteristic
1,,n
Measured Points
1to1mapping
Points2Measure
1,,n
Feature(s)
Characteristic
1,,n
Goodness
1to1mapping
Good/Bad
DESIGN
PLAN
INSPECT
ANALYZE

14 
 
of measuring data are still vendor specific, and as a result interoperability and quality results portability 
suffer.  
Quality Design 
Product design spans an initial idea, model, and refinement. This process requires cooperation of 
multidisciplinary design teams and access to various engineering tools (such as CAD, FEA, dynamic and 
kinematics analysis, simulation, and optimization packages), databases, and knowledge bases. Quality 
design specifies the part quality metrics by identifying features critical to fit and function first. The output 
is a list of features associated with tolerances and datum. 
Product and manufacturing information (PMI) conveys information such as GD&T, 3D annotation (text), 
surface finish, and material specifications. CAD systems that support STEP AP 242 Edition 2 [26]now have 
the capability to generate, save, or transmit tolerance information in a standard format. 
The level of inspection required for any given feature is dictated by the risk of non-conformance. 
Depending on the industry sector, design risk is driven by performance, safety, cost, and fit. 
Manufacturing and inspection risks are dictated by the capability of the fabrication, inspection, and 
assembly systems. The measurement range, work volume, and precision of inspection resources dictate 
the ability to handle the part tolerance defined by the PMI. 
Quality Planning 
Quality planning uses the features and the corresponding characteristic tolerances to assign nominal 
measurement points for the inspection device to probe (number and location of feature points to 
measure) based on type of feature and the specific characteristic tolerance. With the continued growth 
of product complexity and variety, there is a constant demand for more sophisticated planning. 
Our research emphasizes the use of standards to facilitate interoperable quality information exchange. 
Quality planning systems import the product model data with PMI, then import Resources and Rules 
information and generate/export Plans (whats and hows). Figure 11 shows the interplay of the various 
quality components in inspection/quality planning.

15 
 
 
Figure 11 Inspection Planning 
• 
Characteristic – a quality requirement such as dimension, tolerance, finish, material, or assembly, 
used in an inspection process. The importance of GD&T has already been explained. The finish 
and material impact quality but are out of scope for this document. Figure 7 illustrates the 
hierarchical relationship of characteristics to texture, geometric, and dimensional tolerancing. 
• 
Part Feature – defines a manufacturable feature. 
• 
Resources – objects that perform or facilitate measurements. Clearly if a resource does not have 
the capability to measure to enough precision, then it is not a candidate resource. 
o Probes – inspection of a given part requires a sensor to measure a particular feature. 
Different probes may be more suitable to different inspection features, and the matching 
of probe to feature/characteristic quality is part of the planning effort. Further, probe 
operation may be human hand-held or require a coordinate measuring machine. Also 
important when comparing probes, is measuring accuracy, precision, uncertainty, 
repeatability, and the gaging force specifications. These specifications should be matched 
to the requirements of the measuring and inspection operation. 
o Instrument – may require a probe or be a gauge or coordinate measuring machine (CMM). 
Choosing the right CMM for any application requires considering several factors, 
including, the size, weight, and shape of the parts to be measured so that a CMM with 
Inspection
Planning
Inspection
Algorithms
Setup
Finish
Material
Resources
Probes
Instrument
Part
Features
Configuration
&
Capability
Rules
Characteristics
GD&T
Fixtures,
Etc.

16 
 
the appropriate configuration, i.e., fixed or moving bridge, horizontal arm, cantilever, 
gantry, or portable is selected during planning. 
• 
Rules – a specification of the type of measurement activity that should be carried out, given a 
condition context. For example, depending on the rules, an inspection device can measure 9, 15, 
or 1000 cylinder points to assess the quality. Rules are used to define the appropriate inspection 
procedures given the quality context. 
• 
Setup – describes how the measurement components, such as part, measurement device, and 
inspection fixtures are to be physically organized. 
Quality Results 
Quality measurement performs part inspection, in which the actual measurement points are saved, with 
each actual point corresponding to the planned nominal point. Quality results represent parts as 
collections of production knowledge, which includes design, manufacturing, and inspection data. For 
example, a hole can be expressed with geometric design data for the hole location, diameter, and depth. 
A hole can also be associated with GD&T data to ascribe the tolerance of the hole location, diameter, and 
depth as well as relationships to other features.  
Quality results provides a mechanism to record measurement data generated from one or more 
inspections in a digital (computer-readable) format for all GD&T elements. Elements include but are not 
limited to assembly information, part information, features, characteristics, nominal data, actual data 
along with traceability information that is collected during the inspection process such as operator 
identifier, and inspection environment attributes.  
To assess the quality, the measurement data for a manufactured part and the corresponding GD&T 
specifications are compared against the nominal values. Good parts maintain a fit and form within the 
specified GD&T tolerance limits. Tolerancing is widely used in industry to define the allowable variation 
of discrete parts from their ideal shape. 
Often the quality of the product must include traceability reporting to satisfy regulatory compliance. 
Traceability offers information about the circumstances of a quality measurement process, for example, 
the date, time, product instance, machinery, measurements, among others.  
Quality Analysis 
Manufacturing systems are by their nature imperfect. Inadequate control of process variability can lead 
to scrap, rework, and repair. Assuming a stable manufacturing environment, close control of production 
quality through frequent measurement and adjustment to process errors is desirable. Quality analysis 
compares the product measured dimensions to the nominal dimensions and based on the allowed 
tolerance will report the nature of the errors, sometimes over multiple parts, associated with each 
measured feature. 
A major part of quality analysis is statistical process control (SPC), which as its name suggests is a statistical 
method of quality assessment. SPC uses techniques pioneered by Walter A. Shewhart at Bell Laboratories 
in the early 1920s [27]. SPC aims to detect quality (and by implication process) variation at any point of

17 
 
time. In the context of the quality life cycle, SPC uses statistical methods to analyze multiple sequential 
quality reports. SPC uses statistical methods to observe the quality of the performance of the 
manufacturing or design process (as measured by the variability) in order to detect significant variations 
before they result in sub-standard production.  
Also as the name suggests, in SPC, sufficiently large numbers of samples have to be included in the analysis 
to render statistically meaningful results.  The number of samples required could depend on several 
factors, such as the desirable/required confidence/reliability levels of the SPC results, the availability of 
the samples, and the time given for the SPC study. 
These SPC techniques are based on measuring process output and using statistical methods to detect 
excessive variation. Results of the statistical methods are then summarized visually by control charts. SPC 
interpretation is based on assessing the variation in the studied process. It is expected that there will be 
some variation in a process. However, control chart rules should detect poor quality. It is then the onus 
of either or both the product design and manufacturing process to determine the source(s) and root cause 
of the variation; and remediate the cause.   
SPC uses upper and lower control limits based on statistical standard deviation (i.e., σ) distances from the 
mean. A centerline bisects the upper and lower control limits. Some of the typical SPC rules, from the 
Western Electric set of rules [28], are typified by: 1) detection of any single data point falls outside the 3σ 
limit from the centerline 2) two out of three consecutive points fall beyond the 2σ limit, on the same side 
of the centerline; 3) four out of five consecutive points fall beyond the 1σ limit, on the same side of the 
centerline; and 4) nine consecutive points fall on the same side of the centerline. SPC has other general 
performance metrics to detect erroneous error patterns (with or without associated control chart rule) 
including: 1) stratification - variation small relative to control limits; 2) mixture - tendency to avoid the 
centerline; 3) systematic - negative autocorrelation—a long series of observations that alternate high-
low-high-low; 4) repetition - tendency of one chart to follow the same pattern as its predecessor; and 5) 
trends - sustained drift or shift in the long-term mean. Worst cases are that these statistical errors are 
large enough to render the manufacturing process incapable of producing the parts with required quality. 
However, it is the association of bad quality to the source of the problem that can be difficult to resolve. 
Since most quality assessment uses established SPC algorithms, these techniques are for determining a 
problem, rather than resolving the problem. Further, much of the quality assessment and production 
feedback is manual. Instead, the use of advanced software technologies, such as machine learning or big data 
analysis, should be able to catalog and then analyze the results to produce feedback in an end-to-end quality 
chain. Further, the use of more modern technique should be researched to see if these technologies are 
amenable to not only detecting but associating problems to root causes.  
Figure 12 shows the relationship among the various components in the analysis of quality information on 
the upstream and downstream product lifecycle. It is the rejection of parts based on quality and the 
automation of the constituent steps in dealing with the remediation that provides the clear cut benefits. 
The terminology used is as follows. C&R refers to the cause and remedy. ECR refers to an engineering 
change request. PR refers to a problem report. There are some aspects of the quality information models

18 
 
that have been standardized, but complete standardization (and use of these electronic standards) to 
provide the necessary quality, manufacturing, and product information is not available at this time. This 
is the rationale for the mix of manual and automated modes.  
 
 
Figure 12 Quality Analysis and Feedback 
Rules describe the best practices to be used in a production of the given product or assembly. Resources 
describe the hardware and software assets and processes used for manufacturing of a part. Results deal 
with recording of part measurements. Product and PMI include product definition and tolerancing 
information. Analysis deals with multiple part inspections and generally include statistics (such as those 
in SPC). Analysis is dependent on algorithms for comparisons and interpretation of the rules, resources, 
plans, and results. Acceptance of a statistical error depends on the underlying algorithms used to identify 
quality. For example, SPC control charts have some performance metrics for the evaluation of production. 
Analysis that yields non-compliance with SPC algorithms for trends, zones, and standard deviation result 
in rejection of parts. The rejection of parts leads to the cause and remediation steps. In Figure 12, Cause 
and Remediation Rules are assumed to exist, in order for the cause for quality non-compliance to be 
identified. If a matching C&R is found, then a problem report is issued detailing the production deficiency, 
the cause, and remediation. A C&R is generic in nature and the C&R needs to be mapped into an ECR for 
either the engineering design or manufacturing units or both.   
Quality
Results
ANALYSIS
Causes / 
Remedies (C&R)
Definitions
End
Yes
No
Disposition 
Causes / 
Remedies
Disposition 
PRs
Generate 
ECR
Engineering C&R 
Correlations
PMI
Product
Design
Manufacturing
No
Process
Resources
Process
Rules
Accept
PRs

19 
 
 An ECR is used to describe a suggested enhancement or problem with a product. Within the context of a 
quality lifecycle, an ECR originates from detected failure within quality analysis that can be remediated by 
an engineering change. Such failures include non-conforming part and assembly tolerances, repeatable 
part deficiencies, product enhancement ideas, and other various sources. The ECR could propose 
improvements with product components or assemblies, or the ECR could address manufacturing 
problems by specifying changes to the manufacturing process or equipment. 
Currently, most of the remediation is achieved through the use of human knowledge, given the experience 
and understanding to interpret the quality problems. It is hoped that through the use of computer 
analysis, such as machine learning or big data techniques, the computer would understand and interpret 
quality problems and then initiate the ECR. This would imply that the computer can be taught the 
knowledge, patterns, and interpretations through viable machine learning techniques. 
Quality Information Framework (QIF)  
The Quality Information Framework (QIF) is an ANSI standard sponsored by the Dimensional Metrology 
Standards Consortium (DMSC) that defines an integrated set of Extensible Markup Language (XML) 
information models to enable the effective exchange of metrology data throughout the entire 
manufacturing quality measurement process – from product definition to inspection planning to 
execution to analysis and reporting. QIF handles feature-based dimensional metrology, quality 
measurement planning, first article inspection, and discrete quality measurement. QIF is gaining attention 
as an important quality technology [29] [30] [31] [32] [33] [34]. 
The Extensible Markup Language (XML) is a metalanguage, that is, a language used to create other XML 
languages. XML is typically used for defining a language to exchange data across the internet. With XML, 
the contextual meaning of the data can be represented to create a more application-specific language. 
The XML structure is a tree of elements containing branches of XML elements. An XML element is 
delimited by a start tag (ex: <ElementName>) and an end tag (</ElementName >) with CDATA being the non-
markup character data (not XML tag related) between the tags. Elements can also have attributes, which 
are name-value pairs inside start tag (e.g.,: < PartDefinition id="partDefinition1">). The structure of XML is 
fundamentally tree oriented (a graph without any cycles). In QIF, the cross linking of information is done 
using unique identifiers (as shown by the “id” attribute).  
QIF is based on XML, and uses terminology and semantics from the inspection world to represent the 
various elements in the QIF specification. The QIF information models are contained in files written in the 
XML Schema Definitions (XSD). The QIF XSD Version 2.0 models consists of six application schema files 
QIFRules, QIFResults, QIFPlans,  QIFProduct, QIFStatistics, and QIFMeasurementResources bundled into a 
QIF Document. QIF also includes a library of XSD schema files containing information items used by all QIF 
applications (Auxiliary,  Characteristics,  Expressions, Features,  GenericExpressions,  Geometry,  
IntermediatesPMI,  Primitives,  PrimitivesPD,  PrimitivesPMI,  Statistics, Topology,  Traceability,  Units, and 
Visualization ). Figure 13 shows a high level perspective of the relationship among the different IF 
information models. At the core of the QIF architecture is the reusable QIF library which contains 
definitions and components that are referenced by the application areas. Around the QIF library core,

20 
 
Figure 13 shows the six QIF application area information models, Model-Based Design (MBD) which is 
equivalent to QIFProduct, Plans, Resources, Rules, Results, and Statistics. The “QIF Execution” model is, in 
the current version of QIF, a placeholder for future standardization and is now handled by the Dimensional 
Measuring Interface Standard (DMIS) standard [35]. The order of generation of QIF data generally 
proceeds clockwise around the diagram, beginning with QIF MBD and ending with QIF Statistics. Of note, 
users of the QIF information model are not required to implement the entire model. 
   
Figure 13 QIF 2 ‘Life Saver’ Architecture 
The flow of QIF data starts with generation of CAD + PMI data exported as QIF Model Based Design (MBD) 
application data. Quality planning systems import the MBD and generate Plans (whats), then import 
Resources and Rules information and export Plans (whats and hows). Programming systems import Plans 
to generate Dimensional Measurement Equipment (DME) specific programs, or general instructions to 
guide inspection. Dimensional measurement equipment executes programs and evaluates characteristics 
of a single manufactured part or assembly and exports the measurements as Results. Analysis systems, 
typically performing statistical process control, import single parts Results and generate analysis of 
multiple part batches as QIF Statistics data. 
QIF is intended to handle both lossless feedforward information translation, and cater to the ability to 
provide feedback integration to the product lifecycle in a unified and universal XML format. Currently, the 
translation from a CAD model based definition into the QIF format has been approached, and commercial 
products are available and standard processes are under development.  
One goal of QIF is to satisfy the input specification requirements of GD&T. Another goal of QIF is to satisfy 
the requirements derived from output results of quality assessment standards, such as AS9100, 
specifically AP9102A – First Article Inspection Report [36]. Users of the QIF information model are not 
Model-Based
Definition
(CADz,
STEP AP242)
QIF-
Statistics
QIF-Results
QIF-
Rules
Whats
Hows
QIF-Plans
QIF-
Execution
(DMIS)
QIF-
Resources
QIF-MBD
(PDPMI)
QIF
Library
XML Schema

21 
 
required to implement the entire model. Any of the six application models may be used singly for 
exchange of quality data between software systems. 
QIF Software Development 
QIF is an extensive standard and fully defines most areas of quality information, including: quality 
measurement plans, measurement results, measurement rules, measurement resources, and results 
analysis. Currently, QIF has no competing standard or representation to represent measurement results, 
so QIF can be exploited in this area and offer many benefits. Reporting, recording, and analyzing QIF 
measurement results offer some promising opportunities.  
AS9102 is the Society of Manufacturing Engineers (SME) Aerospace Quality Standard, known as, First 
Article Inspection Report (FAIR). The purpose of the First Article Inspection is to provide objective evidence 
that all engineering design and specification requirements are properly understood, accounted for, 
verified, and documented. The purpose of AS9102 standard is to provide a consistent documentation 
requirement for aerospace components First Article Inspection. QIF can be used to generate AS9102 
reports and specific information for filling out a FAIR may be extracted from a QIF 2.0 XML instance file. 
The QIF standards process was especially committed to prove that QIF was sufficient in supplying FAIR 
information. The application of QIF to produce FAIR reports was demonstrated at the 2014 International 
Manufacturing Technology Show (IMTS) [37]. 
In exploratory research at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), QIF has been applied 
to a variety of applications. CodeSynthesis and the Xerces XML/XSD parser have been used to develop 
several QIF software programs useful in end-to-end quality management. These include parsing the QIF 
XML into native C++ format, serializing the C++ native format into QIF XML, generating Structured Query 
Language (SQL) [38] data tables from the QIF XSD, and storing QIF XML file instances into the SQL data 
bases. Figure 14 shows the block diagram of various components that were used in QIF software 
development. This QIF software development includes: 
1. First, CodeSynthesis was downloaded, installed, and then used for C++ code generation. This C++ 
code was compiled and linked with Visual Studio 2010, and the application using the 
CodeSynthesis and Document Object Model (DOM) parsing of QIF was developed. Using the QIF 
explanation of XML First Article Inspection Reporting, Xerces XPath was used to generate FAIR 
report 1, and then more specialized code was developed to read and generate FAIR Report 3. The 
C++ application based on the CodeSynthesis output the FAIR report in HyperText Markup 
Language (HTML) that if opened by Google Chrome was able to produce a clean Portable 
Document Format (PDF) output. 
2. The generated C++ code was also tested by writing QIF results into the native C++ representation, 
and then serializing the results into QIF XML. 
3. Generation of SQL data definition language (DDL) was done to generate SQL data base tables. This 
software development was aimed at archiving the QIF XML.  Although XML is a fine exchange 
language, saving the files into a data base is imperative for archival purposes. Given that XSD

22 
 
defines all the types, it seemed natural to map this specification into type and table SQL DDL and 
the read the QIF XML and insert this into the database using the XSD parsing knowledge.  
 
SQL DDL is compatible with many open source data base providers, such as MySql and PostgreSQl. 
However, it was deemed of utmost importance that SQL tables support arrays within the fields. 
SQL has included this part of the standard since 2004, but some solutions (e.g., MySql) do not 
support arrays. The code was based on the fact that Xerces parsed the QIF XSD, however, the 
documentation describing the XSD parsing was quite limited and the representation from the 
parsing was also complicated. For this reason a symbol table was used to unwind the Xerces XSD 
parsing into a simpler format. Further, many advanced features not considered relevant to 
mapping QIF XSD to SQL DDL were ignored. QIF XSD exercised many features of XSD, but those 
XSD features that were not part of QIF were considered out of scope. 
4. Generation of SQL insertion DDL was developed. The SQL DDL and QIF XML were done after Xerces 
parsed the QIF XSD and also parsed the QIF XML. At some point with a better understanding of 
the Xerces toolkit, the steps to unwind and decipher the Xerces mapping will be unnecessary.  
5. The use of Open Database Connectivity (ODBC) was used to insert the QIF XML into the 
PostgreSQL database, instead of QIF DDL. ODBC is widely supported today, with drivers available 
for most platforms and most databases. Of note, the distinction between 64 and 32 bit ODBC 
caused some headaches. The main issue is insertion of QIF/XML requiring arrays or table entries. 
These insertions require an index from another preexisting table – so these insertions had to be 
completed before the “higher” level insertion was able to complete.

23 
 
 
Figure 14 QIF XML Solution Space 
The saving of multiple QIF XML files was considered important, so the saving of any QIF document into an 
SQL data base was developed. The open source PostgreSQL data base was selected since it supports arrays 
within SQL table fields. PostgreSQL allows columns of a table to be defined as variable-length 
multidimensional arrays. XML depends on the Element tag, which is a container object designed to store 
hierarchical data structures in memory. The element tag can have any number of child subelements and 
can be a list or array. Because of this common XML element software pattern, the mapping of a nested 
hierarchical list into an SQL array is quite straightforward. 
In spite of reliance on SQL array structures, the number of SQL tables generated from the QIF schema was 
quite large (i.e., 1408). Further, although QIF XML was parsed and added to the SQL QIF data base, it is 
not clear how easily it is to access multiply derived substitution groups from the XML. 
The existence of QIF alone does not guarantee success. Hopefully, helpful open source examples will assist 
manufacturers to understand the benefits of QIF and desire technology and solutions based on QIF.  
There are many open source software projects that would help industrial partners understand and use 
QIF. These include: 
1. Software to translate measurement output from one or more native commercial software quality 
systems into QIF 2.0 XML. Once proprietary quality measurements are translated into QIF XML, it 
QIF XSD 
Xerces 
XML/XSD 
Parser/Serializer  
C++ 
Generated Code 
CodeSynthesis 
w/ Xerces 
QIF XML 
Parse w/ C++ 
Generated Code 
FAIR 1&3 
PostgreSQL 
Tables 
QIF XSD 
C++ Software 
Development 
Xerces 
XML/XSD 
Parser/Serializer  
PostgreSQL 
Table Insertion 
QIF XML 
C++ Software 
Development

24 
 
is then straightforward to bundle and transmit the output into as an MTConnect “asset” [39]. 
Once in this QIFXML format, the data could be stored into the SQL data base.  
2. The use of QIF XML to represent part features and quality inspections could be used to record 
defective part GD&T measurements that correlate to a known (or several known) causes and then 
used to train a machine learning program to identify the cause of inspection deviations. 
3. Regenerate QIF XML files from the SQL data base entries. 
QIF Enterprise Integration 
Recently, there has been interest in applying the web-enabled, real-time networking concepts to the 
communication of quality data in a standard XML format.  Historically, the representation of quality data 
has been customized for the particular phase of manufacturing, including, design tolerances, 
measurement planning, inspection, recording/reporting, traceability logging, and statistical process 
control (SPC). The proliferation of data formats in the quality lifecycle is counterproductive, and Quality 
Information Framework (QIF) unifies the disparate quality related information models. With a common 
quality model, it is now cost-effective to disseminate quality information throughout the enterprise. 
Further, it is difficult to improve products and systems if they cannot be accurately measured and 
quantitatively characterized. In order to reduce costs, increase interoperability, and maximize enterprise 
integration, the MTConnect standards have been developed to “open” machine tools and factory floor 
devices for the manufacturing industry [40]. MTConnect is based upon prevalent web technology and 
provides free software development kits to minimize technical and economic barriers to MTConnect 
adoption. 
Preliminary integration of the QIF quality standard and MTConnect has been done on a computer numeric 
control (CNC) system which shows the benefits of such information [39].  The lack of quality standards has 
led to time-consuming and inefficient production quality assessment with numerous opportunities for 
error and misinterpretation. Indeed, the use of MTConnect eases the integration of quality results into 
production processes with its use of XML and Internet communication web technologies.  The role of 
MTConnect, inspection, and SPC was explored by Atluru and Deshpande [41]. A standalone SPC tool was 
developed that communicated with an on-machine probe and analyzed the inspection data to carry out a 
statistical analysis and then distribute the real-time results via an MTConnect network. 
Summary 
This paper reviewed the product life cycle and the role of quality in the design and manufacture of 
products. An emphasis was placed on the “digital thread” for pervasive networking of production 
information, especially quality. Of interest was the Quality Information Framework (QIF), which is an ANSI 
standard that defines an integrated set of XML information models to enable the effective exchange of 
metrology data throughout the entire manufacturing quality measurement process – from product 
definition to inspection planning to execution to analysis and reporting.   The QIF library and QIF 
applications also provide generic templates for the user to instantiate for their own implementations, thus 
enhancing the code reuse and consistency for the implementations.  The ongoing efforts of integrating

25 
 
MTConnect provide a mechanism to further expand integrated manufacturing into the design and 
manufacturing processes. 
The migration of product data management from 2D paper and drawing based to standardized digital 3D 
model based is the goal of the digital thread project at NIST [42]. It is hoped that the benefits of an all-
digital pervasive format will be apparent to manufacturers, in spite of perceived detrimental 
consequences of making the transition. 
Disclaimer 
Commercial equipment and software, many of which are either registered or trademarked, are identified 
in order to adequately specify certain procedures. In no case does such identification imply 
recommendation or endorsement by the National Institute of Standards and Technology, nor does it imply 
that the materials or equipment identified are necessarily the best available for the purpose. 
References 
[1]  United Nations Industrial Development Organization, "Working paper - product quality: A guide for 
small and medium-sized enterprises," 2006. 
[2]  J. Stark, Product Lifecycle Management Decision Engineering, Springer London, 2011.  
[3]  Q. Hao, W. Shen, Z. Zhang, S.-W. Park and J.-K. Lee, "Agent-based collaborative product design 
engineering: An industrial case study," Computers in Industry, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 26-38, January 2006. 
[4]  X. Ming, J. Yan, X. Wang, S. Li, W. Lu, Q. Peng and Y. Ma, "Collaborative process planning and 
manufacturing in product lifecycle management," Computers in Industry, vol. 59, no. 2-3, pp. 154-
166, 2008.  
[5]  F. Ricci, J. Sauza Bedolla, M. G. and P. Chiabert, "PMI: a PLM Approach for the Management of 
Geometrical and Dimensional Controls in Modern Industries," COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN AND 
APPLICATIONS, pp. 36-43, 2014.  
[6]  A. B. Feeney, S. P. Frechette and V. Srinivasan, "A Portrait of an ISO STEP Tolerancing Standard as an 
Enabler of Smart Manufacturing Systems," JOURNAL OF COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SCIENCE 
IN ENGINEERING , vol. 15, no. 2, 2015.  
[7]  F. Ahmed and S. Han, "Semantic Mismatches for Interoperability of Product and Manufacturing 
Information," International Journal of CAD/CAM, vol. 13, no. 2, 2013.

26 
 
[8]  J. Camba, M. Contero, M. Johnson and P. Company, "Extended 3D annotations as a new mechanism 
to explicitly communicate geometric design intent and increase CAD model reusability," Computer-
Aided Design, vol. 57, pp. 61-73, 2014.  
[9]  R. A. Fletcher, G. W. Mulholland, M. R. Winchester, R. L. King and D. B. Klinedinst, "Calibration of a 
Condensation Particle Counter Using a NIST Traceable Method," Aerosol Science and Technology, 
vol. 43, no. 5, pp. 425-441, 2009.  
[10] R. D. Larrabee and M. T. Postek, "Precision, accuracy, uncertainty and traceability and their 
application to submicrometer dimensional metrology," Solid-State Electronics, vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 
673-684, May 1993.  
[11] Joint Committee for Guides in Metrology (JCGM), "International vocabulary of metrology — Basic 
and general concepts and associated terms (VIM)," 2008. 
[12] Wikipedia, "Metrology," [Online]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metrology. [Accessed 29 
7 2015]. 
[13] BS EN ISO 1101, "Geometrical Product Specifications (GPS) – Tolerances of Form, Orientation, 
Location and Run-Out," 2005. 
[14] ISO/IEC, "General Metrology. Part 3: Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in Measurement 
(GUM)," 1995. 
[15] International Organization for Standardization, "ISO 14253-1:2013 Geometrical product 
specifications (GPS) -- Inspection by measurement of workpieces and measuring equipment -- Part 
1: Decision rules for proving conformity or nonconformity with specifications," 2013. 
[16] P. Maropoulos and D. Ceglarek, "Design verification and validation in product lifecycle," CIRP Annals 
- Manufacturing Technology, vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 740-759, 2010.  
[17] T. Milner, M. Volas and A. Sanders, "Systems Engineering Methodology for Linking Requirements to 
Design Complexity and Manufacturing Trade Space Constraints," Procedia Computer Science, vol. 
16, pp. 947-956, 2013.  
[18] P. Singh, P. Jain and S. Jain, "Important Issues in Tolerance Design of Mechanical Assemblies. Part 1: 
Tolerance Analysis," Proceedings of the IMechE Part B: Journal of Engineering Manufacture, vol. 223, 
no. 10, p. 1225–1247, 2009.  
[19] L. Krogstie and K. Martinsen, "Closed Loop Tolerance Engineering - A Relational Model Connecting 
Activities of Product Development," in 45th CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems 2012, 
10.1016/j.procir.2012.07.089, 2012.

27 
 
[20] ISO, "ISO 10303-1:1994 - Industrial automation systems and integration -- Product data 
representation and exchange -- Part 1: Overview and fundamental principles," International 
Organization for Standardization, 1994 . 
[21] ISO, "ISO 14306:2012 Industrial automation systems and integration -- JT file format specification 
for 3D visualization," International Organization for Standardization, 2012. 
[22] DMSC, "ANSI/QIF Part 1–2014: Quality Information Framework (QIF) – An Integrated Model for 
Manufacturing Quality Information Part 1: Overview and Fundamental Principles Version 2.0," 
Dimensional Metrology Standards Consortium, Inc. (DMSC), 2014. 
[23] R. Lipman and J. Lubell, "Conformance checking of PMI representation in CAD model STEP data 
exchange files," Computer-Aided Design, vol. 2015, pp. 14-23.  
[24] International Organization for Standardization, "ISO 1101:2012 Geometrical product specifications 
(GPS) -- Geometrical tolerancing -- Tolerances of form, orientation, location and run-out," 2012. 
[25] American Society of Mechanical Engineers, "ASME Y14.5-2009 Dimensioning and Tolerancing - 
Engineering Drawing and Related Documentation Practices," 2009. 
[26] ISO, "ISO 10303-242:2014 - Industrial automation systems and integration -- Product data 
representation and exchange -- Part 242: Application protocol: Managed model-based 3D 
engineering," International Organization for Standardization, 2014. 
[27] M. Wilcox, "Prediction and pragmatism in Shewhart’s theory of statistical control," Management 
Decision, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 152-165, 2004.  
[28] A. H. a. M. Mathur, "A Very Simple Set of Process Control Rules," Quality Engineering, vol. 5, no. 2, 
pp. 21-29, 1991.  
[29] B. Pippenger, "Three-dimensional model for manufacturing and inspection," in Proceedings ASME 
Turbo Expo 2013: Turbine Technical Conference and Exposition, San Antonio, 2013.  
[30] Y. Zhao, T. Kramer, W. Rippey, J. Horst and F. Proctor, "An integrated data model for quality 
information exchange in manufacturing systems," in Proceedings of the 37th International 
MATADOR 2012 Conference, Manchester, United kingdom, 2013.  
[31] Y. F. Zhao, J. A. Horst, T. R. Kramer, W. Rippey and R. J. Brown, "Quality Information Framework - 
Integrating metrology processes," IFAC Proceedings Volumes (IFAC-PapersOnline), vol. 14, no. Part 
1, pp. 1301 - 1308, 2012.  
[32] T. Kramer, R. Stone, M. Hoffman, S. Hoffman and W. Rippey, "Design and Usage Guide for Version 
0.92 of the Quality Information Framework Data Model and XML (Extensible Markup Language)

28 
 
Schemas," US Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology Internal 
Report, 2012.  
[33] B. Morey, "Metrology Takes Flight," MANUFACTURING ENGINEERING, vol. 152, no. 2, 2014.  
[34] Y. Zhao, T. Kramer, R. Brown and X. Xu, Information modeling for interoperable dimensional 
metrology, Springer Science & Business Media, 2011.  
[35] ANSI, "ANSI/DMIS 105.2 Dimensional Measuring Interface Standard, Rev. 5.2, Part 1," American 
National Standards Institute, 2009. 
[36] SME International, "AS9102 - Aerospace First Article Inspection Requirement Revision B," 6 10 2014. 
[Online]. Available: http://standards.sae.org/as9102b/. [Accessed 22 8 2015]. 
[37] Dimensional Metrology Standards Consortium (DMSC), "IMTS 2014 - DMSC Demonstrates New QIF 
2.0," 2014. [Online]. Available: https://youtu.be/TqeVfqYX3PA. [Accessed 13 7 2015]. 
[38] International Organization for Standardization, "ISO/IEC 9075 - 2:2011 Part 2: Foundation 
(SQL/Foundation). It contains the most central elements of the language and consists of both 
mandatory and optional features.," ISO, 2011. 
[39] J. Michaloski, Y. F. Zhao, B. E. Lee and W. Rippey, "Web-enabled, real-time, quality assurance for 
machining production systems," in Proceedings of the 12th CIRP Conference on Computer Aided 
Tolerancing (CIRP CAT 2012), Huddersfield, UK, 2012.  
[40] MTConnect Institute, "MTConnect Standard," [Online]. Available: http://mtconnect.org. [Accessed 
23 7 2015]. 
[41] S. Atluru and A. Deshpande, "Statistical Process Monitoring With MTConnect," in ASME 2012 
International Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference, 2012.  
[42] National Institute of Standards and Technology, "Enabling the Digital Thread for Smart 
Manufacturing," 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.nist.gov/el/msid/infotest/digital-thread-
manufacturing.cfm. [Accessed 10 7 2015].