United States Department of Commerce 
Technology Administration 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
NIST Technical Note 1297 
1994 Edition 
Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing 
the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
Barry N. Taylor and Chris E. Kuyatt

NIST Technical Note 1297 
1994 Edition 
Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing 
the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
Barry N. Taylor and Chris E. Kuyatt 
Physics Laboratory 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Gaithersburg, MD 20899-0001 
(Supersedes NIST Technical Note 1297, January 1993) 
September 1994 
U.S. Department of Commerce 
Ronald H. Brown, Secretary 
Technology Administration 
Mary L. Good, Under Secretary for Technology 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Arati Prabhakar, Director

National Institute of Standards and 
U.S. Government Printing Office 
For sale by the Superintendent of 
Technology 
Washington: 1994 
Documents 
Technical Note 1297 
U.S. Government Printing Office 
1994 Edition 
Washington, DC 20402 
(Supersedes NIST Technical Note 
1297, January 1993) 
Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol. 
Tech. Note 1297 
1994 Ed. 
24 pages (September 1994) 
CODEN: NTNOEF

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
Preface to the 1994 Edition 
The previous edition, which was the first, of this National 
Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Technical 
Note (TN 1297) was initially published in January 1993. A 
second printing followed shortly thereafter, and in total 
some 10 000 copies were distributed to individuals at NIST 
and in both the United States at large and abroad — to 
metrologists, scientists, engineers, statisticians, and others 
who are concerned with measurement and the evaluation 
and expression of the uncertainty of the result of a 
measurement. On the whole, these individuals gave TN 
1297 a very positive reception. We were, of course, pleased 
that a document intended as a guide to NIST staff was also 
considered to be of significant value to the international 
measurement community. 
Several of the recipients of the 1993 edition of TN 1297 
asked us questions concerning some of the points it 
addressed and some it did not. In view of the nature of the 
subject of evaluating and expressing measurement 
uncertainty and the fact that the principles presented in 
TN 1297 are intended to be applicable to a broad range of 
measurements, such questions were not at all unexpected. 
It soon occurred to us that it might be helpful to the current 
and future users of TN 1297 if the most important of these 
questions were addressed in a new edition. To this end, we 
have added to the 1993 edition of TN 1297 a new appendix 
— Appendix D — which attempts to clarify and give 
additional guidance on a number of topics, including the use 
of certain terms such as accuracy and precision. We hope 
that this new appendix will make this 1994 edition of 
TN 1297 even more useful than its predecessor. 
We also took the opportunity provided us by the preparation 
of a new edition of TN 1297 to make very minor word 
changes in a few portions of the text. These changes were 
made in order to recognize the official publication in 
October 1993 of the ISO Guide to the Expression of 
Uncertainty in Measurement on which TN 1297 is based 
(for example, the reference to the Guide was updated); and 
to bring TN 1297 into full harmony with the Guide (for 
example, “estimated correction” has been changed to simply 
“correction,” and “can be asserted to lie” has been changed 
to “is believed to lie”). 
September 1994 
Barry N. Taylor 
Chris E. Kuyatt 
iii

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
FOREWORD 
(to the 1993 Edition) 
Results of measurements and conclusions derived from them 
constitute much of the technical information produced by 
NIST. It is generally agreed that the usefulness of 
measurement results, and thus much of the information that 
we provide as an institution, is to a large extent determined 
by the quality of the statements of uncertainty that 
accompany them. For example, only if quantitative and 
thoroughly documented statements of uncertainty accompany 
the results of NIST calibrations can the users of our 
calibration services establish their level of traceability to the 
U.S. standards of measurement maintained at NIST. 
Although the vast majority of NIST measurement results are 
accompanied by quantitative statements of uncertainty, there 
has never been a uniform approach at NIST to the expression 
of uncertainty. The use of a single approach within the 
Institute rather than many different approaches would ensure 
the consistency of our outputs, thereby simplifying their 
interpretation. 
To address this issue, in July 1992 I appointed a NIST Ad 
Hoc Committee on Uncertainty Statements and charged it 
with recommending to me a NIST policy on this important 
topic. The members of the Committee were: 
D. C. Cranmer 
Materials Science and Engineering Laboratory 
K. R. Eberhardt 
Computing and Applied Mathematics Laboratory 
R. M. Judish 
Electronics and Electrical Engineering Laboratory 
R. A. Kamper 
Office of the Director, NIST/Boulder Laboratories 
C. E. Kuyatt 
Physics Laboratory 
J. R. Rosenblatt 
Computing and Applied Mathematics Laboratory 
J. D. Simmons 
Technology Services 
L. E. Smith 
Office of the Director, NIST; Chair 
D. A. Swyt 
Manufacturing Engineering Laboratory 
B. N. Taylor 
Physics Laboratory 
R. L. Watters 
Chemical Science and Technology Laboratory 
This action was motivated in part by the emerging 
international consensus on the approach to expressing 
uncertainty 
in 
measurement 
recommended 
by 
the 
International Committee for Weights and Measures (CIPM). 
The movement toward the international adoption of the CIPM 
approach for expressing uncertainty is driven to a large 
extent by the global economy and marketplace; its worldwide 
use will allow measurements performed in different countries 
and in sectors as diverse as science, engineering, commerce, 
industry, and regulation to be more easily understood, 
interpreted, and compared. 
At my request, the Ad Hoc Committee carefully reviewed the 
needs of NIST customers regarding statements of uncertainty 
and the compatibility of those needs with the CIPM 
approach. It concluded that the CIPM approach could be used 
to provide quantitative expressions of measurement 
uncertainty that would satisfy our customers’ requirements. 
The Ad Hoc Committee then recommended to me a specific 
policy for the implementation of that approach at NIST. I 
enthusiastically accepted its recommendation and the policy 
has been incorporated in the NIST Administrative Manual. (It 
is also included in this Technical Note as Appendix C.) 
To assist the NIST staff in putting the policy into practice, 
two members of the Ad Hoc Committee prepared this 
Technical Note. I believe that it provides a helpful discussion 
of the CIPM approach and, with its aid, that the NIST policy 
can be implemented without excessive difficulty. Further, I 
believe that because NIST statements of uncertainty resulting 
from the policy will be uniform among themselves and 
consistent with current international practice, the policy will 
help our customers increase their competitiveness in the 
national and international marketplaces. 
January 1993 
John W. Lyons 
Director, 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
iv

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
GUIDELINES FOR EVALUATING AND EXPRESSING THE 
UNCERTAINTY OF NIST MEASUREMENT RESULTS 
1. Introduction 
1.1 
In October 1992, a new policy on expressing 
measurement uncertainty was instituted at NIST. This policy 
is set forth in “Statements of Uncertainty Associated With 
Measurement Results,” Appendix E, NIST Technical 
Communications 
Program, 
Subchapter 
4.09 
of 
the 
Administrative Manual (reproduced as Appendix C of these 
Guidelines). 
1.2 
The new NIST policy is based on the approach to 
expressing uncertainty in measurement recommended by the 
CIPM1 in 1981 [1] and the elaboration of that approach 
given in the Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in 
Measurement (hereafter called the Guide), which was 
prepared by individuals nominated by the BIPM, IEC, ISO, 
or OIML [2].1 The CIPM approach is founded on 
Recommendation INC-1 (1980) of the Working Group on 
the Statement of Uncertainties [3]. This group was convened 
in 1980 by the BIPM as a consequence of a 19772 request 
by the CIPM that the BIPM study the question of reaching 
an international consensus on expressing uncertainty in 
measurement. The request was initiated by then CIPM 
member and NBS Director E. Ambler. A 19852 request by 
the CIPM to ISO asking it to develop a broadly applicable 
guidance document based on Recommendation INC-1 
(1980) led to the development of the Guide. It is at present 
the most complete reference on the general application of 
the CIPM approach to expressing measurement uncertainty, 
and its development is giving further impetus to the 
worldwide adoption of that approach. 
1.3 
Although the Guide represents the current international 
view of how to express uncertainty in measurement based 
on the CIPM approach, it is a rather lengthy document. We 
have therefore prepared this Technical Note with the goal of 
succinctly presenting, in the context of the new NIST 
policy, those aspects of the Guide that will be of most use 
to the NIST staff in implementing that policy. We have also 
included some suggestions that are not contained in the 
1CIPM: International Committee for Weights and Measures; BIPM: 
International Bureau of Weights and Measures; IEC: International 
Electrotechnical Commission; ISO: International Organization for 
Standardization; OIML: International Organization of Legal Metrology. 
2These dates have been corrected from those in the first (1993) edition of 
TN 1297 and in the Guide. 
Guide or policy but which we believe are useful. However, 
none of the guidance given in this Technical Note is to be 
interpreted as NIST policy unless it is directly quoted from 
the policy itself. Such cases will be clearly indicated in the 
text. 
1.4 
The guidance given in this Technical Note is intended 
to be applicable to most, if not all, NIST measurement 
results, including results associated with 
– international comparisons of measurement standards, 
– basic research, 
– applied research and engineering, 
– calibrating client measurement standards, 
– certifying standard reference materials, and 
– generating standard reference data. 
Since the Guide itself is intended to be applicable to similar 
kinds of measurement results, it may be consulted for 
additional details. Classic expositions of the statistical 
evaluation of measurement processes are given in references 
[4-7]. 
2. Classification of Components of Uncertainty 
2.1 
In general, the result of a measurement is only an 
approximation or estimate of the value of the specific 
quantity subject to measurement, that is, the measurand, 
and thus the result is complete only when accompanied by 
a quantitative statement of its uncertainty. 
2.2 
The uncertainty of the result of a measurement 
generally consists of several components which, in the 
CIPM approach, may be grouped into two categories 
according to the method used to estimate their numerical 
values: 
A. 
those which are evaluated by statistical methods, 
B. 
those which are evaluated by other means. 
2.3 
There is not always a simple correspondence between 
the classification of uncertainty components into categories 
A and B and the commonly used classification of 
uncertainty components as “random” and “systematic.” The 
nature of an uncertainty component is conditioned by the 
use made of the corresponding quantity, that is, on how that 
1

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
quantity appears in the mathematical model that describes 
the measurement process. When the corresponding quantity 
is used in a different way, a “random” component may 
become a “systematic” component and vice versa. Thus the 
terms “random uncertainty” and “systematic uncertainty” 
can be misleading when generally applied. An alternative 
nomenclature that might be used is 
“component of uncertainty arising from a random effect,” 
“component of uncertainty arising from a systematic 
effect,” 
where a random effect is one that gives rise to a possible 
random error in the current measurement process and a 
systematic effect is one that gives rise to a possible 
systematic error in the current measurement process. In 
principle, an uncertainty component arising from a 
systematic effect may in some cases be evaluated by method 
A while in other cases by method B (see subsection 2.2), as 
may be an uncertainty component arising from a random 
effect. 
NOTE – The difference between error and uncertainty should always 
be borne in mind. For example, the result of a measurement after 
correction (see subsection 5.2) can unknowably be very close to the 
unknown value of the measurand, and thus have negligible error, even 
though it may have a large uncertainty (see the Guide [2]). 
2.4 
Basic to the CIPM approach is representing each 
component of uncertainty that contributes to the uncertainty 
of a measurement result by an estimated standard deviation, 
termed standard uncertainty with suggested symbol ui, 
and equal to the positive square root of the estimated 
variance u2 
i . 
2.5 
It follows from subsections 2.2 and 2.4 that an 
uncertainty component in category A is represented by a 
statistically estimated standard deviation si, equal to the 
positive square root of the statistically estimated variance s2 
i , 
and the associated number of degrees of freedom νi. For 
such a component the standard uncertainty is ui = si. 
The evaluation of uncertainty by the statistical analysis of 
series of observations is termed a Type A evaluation (of 
uncertainty). 
2.6 
In a similar manner, an uncertainty component in 
category B is represented by a quantity uj, which may be 
considered an approximation to the corresponding standard 
2
deviation; it is equal to the positive square root of u j , which 
may be considered an approximation to the corresponding 
variance and which is obtained from an assumed probability 
distribution based on all the available information (see 
2
section 4). Since the quantity uj is treated like a variance 
and uj like a standard deviation, for such a component the 
standard uncertainty is simply uj. 
The evaluation of uncertainty by means other than the 
statistical analysis of series of observations is termed a 
Type B evaluation (of uncertainty). 
2.7 
Correlations between components (of either category) 
are characterized by estimated covariances [see Appendix A, 
Eq. (A-3)] or estimated correlation coefficients. 
3. Type A Evaluation of Standard Uncertainty 
A Type A evaluation of standard uncertainty may be based 
on any valid statistical method for treating data. Examples 
are calculating the standard deviation of the mean of a 
series of independent observations [see Appendix A, Eq. (A­
5)]; using the method of least squares to fit a curve to data 
in order to estimate the parameters of the curve and their 
standard deviations; and carrying out an analysis of variance 
(ANOVA) in order to identify and quantify random effects 
in certain kinds of measurements. If the measurement 
situation is especially complicated, one should consider 
obtaining the guidance of a statistician. The NIST staff can 
consult and collaborate in the development of statistical 
experiment designs, analysis of data, and other aspects of 
the evaluation of measurements with the Statistical 
Engineering Division, Computing and Applied Mathematics 
Laboratory. Inasmuch as this Technical Note does not 
attempt to give detailed statistical techniques for carrying 
out Type A evaluations, references [4-7], and reference [8] 
in which a general approach to quality control of 
measurement systems is set forth, should be consulted for 
basic principles and additional references. 
4. Type B Evaluation of Standard Uncertainty 
4.1 
A Type B evaluation of standard uncertainty is usually 
based on scientific judgment using all the relevant 
information available, which may include 
– previous measurement data, 
– experience with, or general knowledge of, the 
behavior and property of relevant materials and 
instruments, 
– manufacturer’s specifications, 
– data provided in calibration and other reports, and 
– uncertainties assigned to reference data taken from 
handbooks. 
2

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
Some examples of Type B evaluations are given in 
subsections 4.2 to 4.6. 
4.2 
Convert a quoted uncertainty that is a stated multiple 
of an estimated standard deviation to a standard uncertainty 
by dividing the quoted uncertainty by the multiplier. 
4.3 
Convert a quoted uncertainty that defines a 
“confidence interval” having a stated level of confidence 
(see subsection 5.5), such as 95 or 99 percent, to a standard 
uncertainty by treating the quoted uncertainty as if a normal 
distribution had been used to calculate it (unless otherwise 
indicated) and dividing it by the appropriate factor for such 
a distribution. These factors are 1.960 and 2.576 for the two 
levels of confidence given (see also the last line of Table 
B.1 of Appendix B). 
4.4 
Model the quantity in question by a normal 
distribution and estimate lower and upper limits a and a+ 
such that the best estimated value of the quantity is 
(a+ + a )/2 (i.e., the center of the limits) and there is 1 
chance out of 2 (i.e., a 50 percent probability) that the value 
of the quantity lies in the interval a to a+. Then uj ≈ 1.48a, 
where a = (a+ 
a )/2 is the half-width of the interval. 
4.5 
Model the quantity in question by a normal 
distribution and estimate lower and upper limits a and a+ 
such that the best estimated value of the quantity is 
(a+ + a )/2 and there is about a 2 out of 3 chance (i.e., a 67 
percent probability) that the value of the quantity lies in the 
interval a to a+. Then uj ≈ a, where a = (a+ 
a )/2. 
4.6 
Estimate lower and upper limits a and a+ for the 
value of the quantity in question such that the probability 
that the value lies in the interval a to a+ is, for all practical 
purposes, 100 percent. Provided that there is no 
contradictory information, treat the quantity as if it is 
equally probable for its value to lie anywhere within the 
interval a 
to a+; that is, model it by a uniform or 
rectangular probability distribution. The best estimate of the 
value of the quantity is then (a+ + a )/2 with uj = a/⎯√3, 
where a = (a+ 
a )/2. 
If the distribution used to model the quantity is triangular 
rather than rectangular, then uj = a/⎯√6. 
If the quantity in question is modeled by a normal 
distribution as in subsections 4.4 and 4.5, there are no finite 
limits that will contain 100 percent of its possible values. 
However, plus and minus 3 standard deviations about the 
mean of a normal distribution corresponds to 99.73 percent 
limits. Thus, if the limits a 
and a+ of a normally 
distributed quantity with mean (a+ + a )/2 are considered to 
contain “almost all” of the possible values of the quantity, 
that is, approximately 99.73 percent of them, then uj ≈ a/3, 
where a = (a+ 
a )/2. 
The rectangular distribution is a reasonable default model in 
the absence of any other information. But if it is known that 
values of the quantity in question near the center of the 
limits are more likely than values close to the limits, a 
triangular or a normal distribution may be a better model. 
4.7 
Because the reliability of evaluations of components 
of uncertainty depends on the quality of the information 
available, it is recommended that all parameters upon which 
the measurand depends be varied to the fullest extent 
practicable so that the evaluations are based as much as 
possible on observed data. Whenever feasible, the use of 
empirical models of the measurement process founded on 
long-term quantitative data, and the use of check standards 
and control charts that can indicate if a measurement 
process is under statistical control, should be part of the 
effort to obtain reliable evaluations of components of 
uncertainty [8]. Type A evaluations of uncertainty based on 
limited data are not necessarily more reliable than soundly 
based Type B evaluations. 
5. Combined Standard Uncertainty 
5.1 
The combined standard uncertainty of a measure­
ment result, suggested symbol u , is taken to represent the 
c
estimated standard deviation of the result. It is obtained by 
combining the individual standard uncertainties ui (and 
covariances as appropriate), whether arising from a Type A 
evaluation or a Type B evaluation, using the usual method 
for combining standard deviations. This method, which is 
summarized in Appendix A [Eq. (A-3)], is often called the 
law of propagation of uncertainty and in common parlance 
the “root-sum-of-squares” (square root of the sum-of-the-
squares) or “RSS” method of combining uncertainty 
components estimated as standard deviations. 
NOTE – The NIST policy also allows the use of established and 
documented methods equivalent to the “RSS” method, such as the 
numerically based “bootstrap” (see Appendix C). 
5.2 
It is assumed that a correction (or correction factor) is 
applied to compensate for each recognized systematic effect 
that significantly influences the measurement result and that 
every effort has been made to identify such effects. The 
relevant uncertainty to associate with each recognized 
systematic effect is then the standard uncertainty of the 
applied correction. The correction may be either positive, 
negative, or zero, and its standard uncertainty may in some 
3

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
cases be obtained from a Type A evaluation while in other 
cases by a Type B evaluation. 
NOTES 
1 The uncertainty of a correction applied to a measurement result to 
compensate for a systematic effect is not the systematic error in the 
measurement result due to the effect. Rather, it is a measure of the 
uncertainty of the result due to incomplete knowledge of the required 
value of the correction. The terms “error” and “uncertainty” should not 
be confused (see also the note of subsection 2.3). 
2 Although it is strongly recommended that corrections be applied for 
all recognized significant systematic effects, in some cases it may not 
be practical because of limited resources. Nevertheless, the expression 
of uncertainty in such cases should conform with these guidelines to 
the fullest possible extent (see the Guide [2]). 
5.3 
The combined standard uncertainty u
is a widely
c 
employed measure of uncertainty. The NIST policy on 
expressing uncertainty states that (see Appendix C): 
Commonly, u
is used for reporting results of
c 
determinations of fundamental constants, fundamental 
metrological research, and international comparisons 
of realizations of SI units. 
Expressing the uncertainty of NIST’s primary cesium 
frequency standard as an estimated standard deviation is an 
example of the use of u
in fundamental metrological 
c 
research. It should also be noted that in a 1986 
recommendation [9], the CIPM requested that what is now 
termed combined standard uncertainty u be used “by all 
c 
participants in giving the results of all international 
comparisons or other work done under the auspices of the 
CIPM and Comités Consultatifs.” 
5.4 
In many practical measurement situations, the 
probability distribution characterized by the measurement 
result y and its combined standard uncertainty u (y) is 
c
approximately normal (Gaussian). When this is the case and 
u (y) itself has negligible uncertainty (see Appendix B), 
c
u (y) defines an interval y
u (y) to y + u (y) about the 
c
c
c
measurement result y within which the value of the 
measurand Y estimated by y is believed to lie with a level 
of confidence of approximately 68 percent. That is, it is 
believed with an approximate level of confidence of 68 
percent that y
u (y) ≤ Y ≤ y + u (y), which is commonly 
c
c
written as Y = y ± u (y).
c
The 
probability 
distribution 
characterized 
by 
the 
measurement result and its combined standard uncertainty is 
approximately normal when the conditions of the Central 
Limit Theorem are met. This is the case, often encountered 
in practice, when the estimate y of the measurand Y is not 
determined directly but is obtained from the estimated 
values of a significant number of other quantities [see 
Appendix A, Eq. (A-1)] describable by well-behaved 
probability distributions, such as the normal and rectangular 
distributions; the standard uncertainties of the estimates of 
these quantities contribute comparable amounts to the 
combined standard uncertainty u (y) of the measurement 
c
result y; and the linear approximation implied by Eq. (A-3) 
in Appendix A is adequate. 
NOTE – If u ( y) has non-negligible uncertainty, the level of confidence 
c
will differ from 68 percent. The procedure given in Appendix B has 
been proposed as a simple expedient for approximating the level of 
confidence in these cases. 
5.5 
The term “confidence interval” has a specific 
definition in statistics and is only applicable to intervals 
based on u when certain conditions are met, including that 
c 
all components of uncertainty that contribute to u
be
c 
obtained from Type A evaluations. Thus, in these 
guidelines, an interval based on u
is viewed as
c 
encompassing a fraction p of the probability distribution 
characterized by the measurement result and its combined 
standard uncertainty, and p is the coverage probability or 
level of confidence of the interval. 
6. Expanded Uncertainty 
6.1 
Although the combined standard uncertainty u is used 
c 
to express the uncertainty of many NIST measurement 
results, for some commercial, industrial, and regulatory 
applications of NIST results (e.g., when health and safety 
are concerned), what is often required is a measure of 
uncertainty that defines an interval about the measurement 
result y within which the value of the measurand Y is 
confidently believed to lie. The measure of uncertainty 
intended to meet this requirement is termed expanded 
uncertainty, suggested symbol U, and is obtained by 
multiplying u (y) by a coverage factor, suggested symbol 
c
k. Thus U = ku (y) and it is confidently believed that 
c
y
U ≤ Y ≤ y + U, which is commonly written as 
Y = y ± U. 
It is to be understood that subsection 5.5 also applies to the 
interval defined by expanded uncertainty U. 
6.2 
In general, the value of the coverage factor k is 
chosen on the basis of the desired level of confidence to be 
associated with the interval defined by U = ku . Typically, 
c
k is in the range 2 to 3. When the normal distribution 
applies and u
has negligible uncertainty (see subsection 
c 
5.4), U = 2u (i.e., k = 2) defines an interval having a level 
c 
of confidence of approximately 95 percent, and U = 3uc 
4

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
(i.e., k = 3) defines an interval having a level of confidence 
greater than 99 percent. 
NOTE – For a quantity z described by a normal distribution with 
expectation µ
and standard deviation σ, the interval µ ± kσ
z
z 
encompasses 68.27, 90, 95.45, 99, and 99.73 percent of the distribution 
for k = 1, k = 1.645, k = 2, k = 2.576, and k = 3, respectively (see the 
last line of Table B.1 of Appendix B). 
6.3 
Ideally, one would like to be able to choose a specific 
value of k that produces an interval corresponding to a well-
defined level of confidence p, such as 95 or 99 percent; 
equivalently, for a given value of k, one would like to be 
able to state unequivocally the level of confidence 
associated with that interval. This is difficult to do in 
practice because it requires knowing in considerable detail 
the probability distribution of each quantity upon which the 
measurand depends and combining those distributions to 
obtain the distribution of the measurand. 
NOTE – The more thorough the investigation of the possible existence 
of non-trivial systematic effects and the more complete the data upon 
which the estimates of the corrections for such effects are based, the 
closer one can get to this ideal (see subsections 4.7 and 5.2). 
6.4 
The CIPM approach does not specify how the relation 
between k and p is to be established. The Guide [2] and 
Dietrich [10] give an approximate solution to this problem 
(see Appendix B); it is possible to implement others which 
also approximate the result of combining the probability 
distributions assumed for each quantity upon which the 
measurand depends, for example, solutions based on 
numerical methods. 
6.5 
In light of the discussion of subsections 6.1- 6.4, and 
in keeping with the practice adopted by other national 
standards 
laboratories 
and 
several 
metrological 
organizations, the stated NIST policy is (see Appendix C): 
Use expanded uncertainty U to report the results of all 
NIST measurements other than those for which uc has 
traditionally been employed. To be consistent with 
current international practice, the value of k to be 
used at NIST for calculating U is, by convention, 
k = 2. Values of k other than 2 are only to be used for 
specific applications dictated by established and 
documented requirements. 
An example of the use of a value of k other than 2 is taking 
k equal to a t-factor obtained from the t-distribution when uc 
has low degrees of freedom in order to meet the dictated 
requirement of providing a value of U = ku that defines an 
c 
interval having a level of confidence close to 95 percent. 
(See Appendix B for a discussion of how a value of k that 
produces such a value of U might be approximated.) 
6.6 
The NIST policy provides for exceptions as follows 
(see Appendix C): 
It is understood that any valid statistical method that 
is 
technically 
justified 
under 
the 
existing 
circumstances may be used to determine the 
equivalent of ui, u , or U. Further, it is recognized 
c
that international, national, or contractual agreements 
to which NIST is a party may occasionally require 
deviation from NIST policy. In both cases, the report 
of uncertainty must document what was done and 
why. 
7. Reporting Uncertainty 
7.1 
The 
stated 
NIST 
policy 
regarding 
reporting 
uncertainty is (see Appendix C): 
Report U together with the coverage factor k used to 
obtain it, or report u .
c
When reporting a measurement result and its 
uncertainty, include the following information in the 
report itself or by referring to a published document: 
– A list of all components of standard uncertainty, 
together with their degrees of freedom where 
appropriate, and the resulting value of u . The
c
components should be identified according to the 
method used to estimate their numerical values: 
A. 
those which are evaluated by statistical 
methods, 
B. 
those which are evaluated by other 
means. 
– A detailed description of how each component of 
standard uncertainty was evaluated. 
– A description of how k was chosen when k is not 
taken equal to 2. 
It is often desirable to provide a probability 
interpretation, such as a level of confidence, for the 
interval defined by U or u . When this is done, the 
c
basis for such a statement must be given. 
7.2 
The NIST requirement that a full description of what 
was done be given is in keeping with the generally accepted 
view that when reporting a measurement result and its 
uncertainty, it is preferable to err on the side of providing 
5

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
too much information rather than too little. However, when 
such details are provided to the users of NIST measurement 
results by referring to published documents, which is often 
the case when such results are given in calibration and test 
reports and certificates, it is imperative that the referenced 
documents be kept up-to-date so that they are consistent 
with the measurement process in current use. 
7.3 
The last paragraph of the NIST policy on reporting 
uncertainty (see subsection 7.1 above) refers to the 
desirability of providing a probability interpretation, such as 
a level of confidence, for the interval defined by U or u .
c
The following examples show how this might be done when 
the numerical result of a measurement and its assigned 
uncertainty is reported, assuming that the published detailed 
description of the measurement provides a sound basis for 
the statements made. (In each of the three cases, the 
quantity whose value is being reported is assumed to be a 
nominal 100 g standard of mass m .)
s
m = (100.021 47 ± 0.000 70) g, where the number
s 
following the symbol ± is the numerical value of an 
expanded uncertainty U = ku , with U determined from 
c
a combined standard uncertainty (i.e., estimated standard 
deviation) u = 0.35 mg and a coverage factor k = 2. 
c 
Since it can be assumed that the possible estimated 
values of the standard are approximately normally 
distributed with approximate standard deviation u , the 
c
unknown value of the standard is believed to lie in the 
interval defined by U with a level of confidence of 
approximately 95 percent. 
m = (100.021 47 ± 0.000 79) g, where the number
s 
following the symbol ± is the numerical value of an 
expanded uncertainty U = ku , with U determined from 
c
a combined standard uncertainty (i.e., estimated standard 
deviation) u = 0.35 mg and a coverage factor k = 2.26
c 
based on the t-distribution for ν = 9 degrees of freedom, 
and defines an interval within which the unknown value 
of the standard is believed to lie with a level of 
confidence of approximately 95 percent. 
m = 100.021 47 g with a combined standard uncertainty 
s 
(i.e., estimated standard deviation) of u = 0.35 mg. 
c 
Since it can be assumed that the possible estimated 
values of the standard are approximately normally 
distributed with approximate standard deviation u , the 
c
unknown value of the standard is believed to lie in the 
interval ms ± uc with a level of confidence of 
approximately 68 percent. 
When providing such probability interpretations of the 
intervals defined by U and u , subsection 5.5 should be 
c
recalled. In this regard, the interval defined by U in the 
second example might be a conventional confidence interval 
(at least approximately) if all the components of uncertainty 
are obtained from Type A evaluations. 
7.4 
Some users of NIST measurement results may 
automatically interpret U = 2u
and u
as quantities that 
c
c 
define intervals having levels of confidence corresponding 
to those of a normal distribution, namely, 95 percent and 68 
percent, respectively. Thus, when reporting either U = 2uc 
or u , if it is known that the interval which U = 2u or u
c
c
c 
defines has a level of confidence that differs significantly 
from 95 percent or 68 percent, it should be so stated as an 
aid to the users of the measurement result. In keeping with 
the NIST policy quoted in subsection 6.5, when the measure 
of uncertainty is expanded uncertainty U, one may use a 
value of k that does lead to a value of U that defines an 
interval having a level of confidence of 95 percent if such 
a value of U is necessary for a specific application dictated 
by an established and documented requirement. 
7.5 
In general, it is not possible to know in detail all of 
the uses to which a particular NIST measurement result will 
be put. Thus, it is usually inappropriate to include in the 
uncertainty reported for a NIST result any component that 
arises from a NIST assessment of how the result might be 
employed; the quoted uncertainty should normally be the 
actual uncertainty obtained at NIST. 
7.6 
It follows from subsection 7.5 that for standards sent 
by customers to NIST for calibration, the quoted uncertainty 
should not normally include estimates of the uncertainties 
that may be introduced by the return of the standard to the 
customer’s laboratory or by its use there as a reference 
standard for other measurements. Such uncertainties are due, 
for example, to effects arising from transportation of the 
standard to the customer’s laboratory, including mechanical 
damage; the passage of time; and differences between the 
environmental conditions at the customer’s laboratory and 
at NIST. A caution may be added to the reported 
uncertainty if any such effects are likely to be significant 
and an additional uncertainty for them may be estimated and 
quoted. If, for the convenience of the customer, this 
additional uncertainty is combined with the uncertainty 
obtained at NIST, a clear statement should be included 
explaining that this has been done. 
Such considerations are also relevant to the uncertainties 
assigned to certified devices and materials sold by NIST. 
However, well-justified, normal NIST practices, such as 
including a component of uncertainty to account for the 
instability of the device or material when it is known to be 
6

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
significant, are clearly necessary if the assigned uncertainties 
are to be meaningful. 
8. References 
[1] 
CIPM, BIPM Proc.-Verb. Com. Int. Poids et Mesures 
49, 8-9, 26 (1981) (in French); P. Giacomo, “News 
from the BIPM,” Metrologia 18, 41-44 (1982). 
[2] 
ISO, Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in 
Measurement 
(International 
Organization 
for 
Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland, 1993). This 
Guide was prepared by ISO Technical Advisory 
Group 4 (TAG 4), Working Group 3 (WG 3). 
ISO/TAG 4 has as its sponsors the BIPM, IEC, IFCC 
(International Federation of Clinical Chemistry), ISO, 
IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied 
Chemistry), IUPAP (International Union of Pure and 
Applied Physics), and OIML. Although the individual 
members of WG 3 were nominated by the BIPM, 
IEC, ISO, or OIML, the Guide is published by ISO in 
the name of all seven organizations. NIST staff 
members may obtain a single copy of the Guide from 
the NIST Calibration Program. 
[3] 
R. Kaarls, “Rapport du Groupe de Travail sur 
l’Expression des Incertitudes au Comité International 
des Poids et Mesures,” Proc.-Verb. Com. Int. Poids et 
Mesures 49, A1-A12 (1981) (in French); P. Giacomo, 
“News from the BIPM,” Metrologia 17, 69-74 (1981). 
(Note that the final English-language version of 
Recommendation INC-1 (1980), published in an 
internal BIPM report, differs slightly from that given 
in the latter reference but is consistent with the 
authoritative French-language version given in the 
former reference.) 
[4] 
C. Eisenhart, “Realistic Evaluation of the Precision 
and Accuracy of Instrument Calibration Systems,” J. 
Res. Natl. Bur. Stand. (U.S.) 67C, 161-187 (1963). 
Reprinted, with corrections, in Precision Measurement 
and Calibration: Statistical Concepts and Procedures, 
NBS Special Publication 300, Vol. I, H. H. Ku, Editor 
(U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, 
1969), pp. 21-48. 
[5] 
J. Mandel, The Statistical Analysis of Experimental 
Data (Interscience-Wiley Publishers, New York, NY, 
1964, out of print; corrected and reprinted, Dover 
Publishers, New York, NY, 1984). 
[6] 
M. G. Natrella, Experimental Statistics, NBS 
Handbook 91 (U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC, 1963; reprinted October 1966 with 
corrections). 
[7] 
G. E. P. Box, W. G. Hunter, and J. S. Hunter, 
Statistics for Experimenters (John Wiley & Sons, New 
York, NY, 1978). 
[8] 
C. Croarkin, Measurement Assurance Programs, Part 
II: Development and Implementation, NBS Special 
Publication 676-II (U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Washington, DC, 1985). 
[9] 
CIPM, BIPM Proc.-Verb. Com. Int. Poids et Mesures 
54, 14, 35 (1986) (in French); P. Giacomo, “News 
from the BIPM,” Metrologia 24, 45-51 (1987). 
[10] C. F. Dietrich, Uncertainty, Calibration and 
Probability, second edition (Adam Hilger, Bristol, 
U.K., 1991), chapter 7. 
Appendix A 
Law of Propagation of Uncertainty 
A.1 In many cases a measurand Y is not measured 
directly, but is determined from N other quantities 
X1, X2, . . . , XN through a functional relation f: 
Y
f(X1, X2 , . . . , XN ). 
(A-1) 
Included among the quantities Xi are corrections (or 
correction factors) as described in subsection 5.2, as well as 
quantities that take into account other sources of variability, 
such 
as 
different 
observers, 
instruments, 
samples, 
laboratories, and times at which observations are made (e.g., 
different days). Thus the function f of Eq. (A-1) should 
express not simply a physical law but a measurement 
process, and in particular, it should contain all quantities 
that can contribute a significant uncertainty to the 
measurement result. 
A.2 An estimate of the measurand or output quantity Y, 
denoted by y, is obtained from Eq. (A-1) using input 
estimates x1, x2, . . . , xN for the values of the N input 
quantities X1, X2, . . . , XN. Thus the output estimate y, 
which is the result of the measurement, is given by 
y
f(x1, x2 , . . . , xN ). 
(A-2) 
7

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
A.3 The 
combined 
standard 
uncertainty 
of 
the 
measurement result y, designated by u ( y) and taken to 
c
represent the estimated standard deviation of the result, is 
the positive square root of the estimated variance u2( y)
c
obtained from 
⎛⎜⎜⎝ 
∂f 
∂xi 
 
2 
u2(xi ) 
N 
u 2 
c ( y) 
Appendix B 
i 1 
(A-3) 
N 1 
2 
i 1 
N 
j i 1 
∂f 
∂xi 
∂f u(xi , xj ).
∂xj 
Equation (A-3) is based on a first-order Taylor series 
approximation 
of 
Y = f(X1, X2, . . . , XN) 
and 
is 
conveniently referred to as the law of propagation of 
uncertainty. The partial derivatives ∂f/∂xi (often referred to 
as sensitivity coefficients) are equal to ∂f/∂Xi evaluated at 
Xi = xi; u(xi) is the standard uncertainty associated with the 
input estimate xi; and u(xi , xj) is the estimated covariance 
associated with xi and xj. 
A.4 As an example of a Type A evaluation, consider an 
input quantity Xi whose value is estimated from n 
independent observations Xi,k of Xi obtained under the same 
conditions of measurement. In this case the input estimate 
xi is usually the sample mean 
n 
xi 
X i 
1 
Xi, k , 
(A-4) 
n k 1 
and the standard uncertainty u(xi) to be associated with xi is 
the estimated standard deviation of the mean 
u(xi ) 
s(X i ) 
where a = (a+ 
a )/2 (see subsection 4.6). 
NOTE – When xi is obtained from an assumed distribution, the 
associated variance is appropriately written as u2(Xi) and the associated 
standard uncertainty as u(Xi ), but for simplicity, u2(xi ) and u(xi ) are 
used. Similar considerations apply to the symbols u2( y) and u ( y).
c
c
Coverage Factors 
B.1 This appendix summarizes a conventional procedure, 
given by the Guide [2] and Dietrich [10], intended for use 
in calculating a coverage factor k when the conditions of the 
Central Limit Theorem are met (see subsection 5.4) and (1) 
a value other than k = 2 is required for a specific 
application dictated by an established and documented 
requirement; and (2) that value of k must provide an interval 
having a level of confidence close to a specified value. 
More specifically, it is intended to yield a coverage factor 
k that produces an expanded uncertainty U = k u ( y) that 
p 
p
p c
defines an interval y 
Up ≤ Y ≤ y + Up, which is 
commonly written as Y = y ± Up, having an approximate 
level of confidence p. 
The four-step procedure is included in these guidelines 
because it is expected to find broad acceptance 
internationally, due in part to its computational convenience, 
in much the same way that k = 2 has become the 
conventional coverage factor. However, although the 
procedure is based on a proven approximation, it should not 
be interpreted as being rigourous because the approximation 
is extrapolated to situations where its applicability has yet 
to be fully investigated. 
B.2 To estimate the value of such a coverage factor 
1/2 
(A-5) 
requires taking into account the uncertainty of uc( y), that is, 
⎛⎜⎜⎝ 
 
n
1 
2 
n(n 1) k 1 
how well u ( y) estimates the standard deviation associated 
c
(Xi, k X i )
. 
with the measurement result. For an estimate of the standard 
deviation of a normal distribution, the degrees of freedom 
of the estimate, which depends on the size of the sample on 
which the estimate is based, is a measure of its uncertainty. 
For a combined standard uncertainty u ( y), the “effective 
c
degrees of freedom” νeff of u ( y), which is approximated by 
c
appropriately combining the degrees of freedom of its 
components, is a measure of its uncertainty. Hence νeff is a 
key factor in determining k . For example, if νeff is less 
p
than about 11, simply assuming that the uncertainty of u ( y) 
is negligible and taking k = 2 may be inadequate if an 
expanded uncertainty U = ku ( y) that defines an interval 
c
having a level of confidence close to 95 percent is required 
for a specific application. More specifically, according to 
A.5 As an example of a Type B evaluation, consider an 
input quantity Xi whose value is estimated from an assumed 
rectangular probability distribution of lower limit a and 
upper limit a+. In this case the input estimate is usually the 
expectation of the distribution 
(A-6)
xi 
(a 
a ) 2 , 
and the standard uncertainty u(xi) to be associated with xi is 
the positive square root of the variance of the distribution 
(A-7)
u(xi ) 
a 
3 , 
c
8

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
Table B.1 (to be discussed below), if νeff = 8, k95 = 2.3 
rather than 2.0. In this case, and in other similar cases 
where ν
( y) is comparatively small and an interval 
eff of uc
having a level of confidence close to a specified level is 
required, it is unlikely that the uncertainty of u ( y) would be 
c
considered negligible. Instead, the small value of νeff, and 
thus the uncertainty of u ( y), would probably be taken into 
c
account when determining kp. 
B.3 The four-step procedure for calculating kp is as 
follows: 
1) Obtain y and u ( y) as indicated in Appendix A. 
c
2) Estimate the effective degrees of freedom ν
( y)
eff of uc
from the Welch-Satterthwaite formula 
u 4( y)
c
ν
,
eff 
4 
(B-1)
N ci u 4( xi ) 
ν
i 1 
i 
where ci ≡∂f/∂xi, all of the u(xi) are mutually statistically 
independent, νi is the degrees of freedom of u(xi), and 
N 
(B-2)
ν
νi .
eff ≤ 
i 1 
The degrees of freedom of a standard uncertainty u(xi) 
obtained from a Type A evaluation is determined by 
appropriate statistical methods [7]. In the common case 
discussed in subsection A.4 where xi = Xi and u(xi) = s(Xi), 
the degrees of freedom of u(xi) is ν = n 1. If m
i 
parameters are estimated by fitting a curve to n data points 
by the method of least squares, the degrees of freedom of 
the standard uncertainty of each paramter is n
m. 
The degrees of freedom to associate with a standard 
uncertainty u(xi) obtained from a Type B evaluation is more 
problematic. However, it is common practice to carry out 
such evaluations in a manner that ensures that an 
underestimation is avoided. For example, when lower and 
upper limits a and a+ are set as in the case discussed in 
subsection A.5, they are usually chosen in such a way that 
the probability of the quantity in question lying outside 
these limits is in fact extremely small. Under the assumption 
that this practice is followed, the degrees of freedom of 
u(xi) may be taken to be νi →∞. 
NOTE – See the Guide [2] for a possible way to estimate νi when this 
assumption is not justified. 
3) Obtain the t-factor t (νeff) for the required level of 
p
confidence p from a table of values of tp(ν) from the 
t-distribution, such as Table B.1 of this Appendix. If νeff is 
not an integer, which will usually be the case, either 
interpolate or truncate νeff to the next lower integer. 
4) Take k = t (νeff) and calculate U = k u ( y).
p
p
p
p c
9

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
Table B.1 — Value of tp(ν) from the t-distribution for degrees of freedom ν that defines an interval tp(ν) to 
+t (ν) that encompasses the fraction p of the distribution 
p
Degrees of 
freedom 
ν 
Fraction p in percent 
68.27(a) 
90 
95 
95.45(a) 
99 
99.73(a) 
1 
1.84 
6.31 
12.71 
13.97 
63.66 
235.80 
2 
1.32 
2.92 
4.30 
4.53 
9.92 
19.21 
3 
1.20 
2.35 
3.18 
3.31 
5.84 
9.22 
4 
1.14 
2.13 
2.78 
2.87 
4.60 
6.62 
5 
1.11 
2.02 
2.57 
2.65 
4.03 
5.51 
6 
1.09 
1.94 
2.45 
2.52 
3.71 
4.90 
7 
1.08 
1.89 
2.36 
2.43 
3.50 
4.53 
8 
1.07 
1.86 
2.31 
2.37 
3.36 
4.28 
9 
1.06 
1.83 
2.26 
2.32 
3.25 
4.09 
10 
1.05 
1.81 
2.23 
2.28 
3.17 
3.96 
11 
1.05 
1.80 
2.20 
2.25 
3.11 
3.85 
12 
1.04 
1.78 
2.18 
2.23 
3.05 
3.76 
13 
1.04 
1.77 
2.16 
2.21 
3.01 
3.69 
14 
1.04 
1.76 
2.14 
2.20 
2.98 
3.64 
15 
1.03 
1.75 
2.13 
2.18 
2.95 
3.59 
16 
1.03 
1.75 
2.12 
2.17 
2.92 
3.54 
17 
1.03 
1.74 
2.11 
2.16 
2.90 
3.51 
18 
1.03 
1.73 
2.10 
2.15 
2.88 
3.48 
19 
1.03 
1.73 
2.09 
2.14 
2.86 
3.45 
20 
1.03 
1.72 
2.09 
2.13 
2.85 
3.42 
25 
1.02 
1.71 
2.06 
2.11 
2.79 
3.33 
30 
1.02 
1.70 
2.04 
2.09 
2.75 
3.27 
35 
1.01 
1.70 
2.03 
2.07 
2.72 
3.23 
40 
1.01 
1.68 
2.02 
2.06 
2.70 
3.20 
45 
1.01 
1.68 
2.01 
2.06 
2.69 
3.18 
50 
1.01 
1.68 
2.01 
2.05 
2.68 
3.16 
100 
1.005 
1.660 
1.984 
2.025 
2.626 
3.077 
∞ 
1.000 
1.645 
1.960 
2.000 
2.576 
3.000 
(a)For a quantity z described by a normal distribution with expectation µ and standard deviation σ, the 
z 
interval µ ± kσ encompasses p = 68.27, 95.45, and 99.73 percent of the distribution for k = 1, 2, and 
z 
3, respectively. 
10

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
Appendix C 
NIST Technical Communications Program 
APPENDIX E 
STATEMENTS OF UNCERTAINTY ASSOCIATED WITH 
MEASUREMENT RESULTS 
A 
measurement 
result 
is 
complete 
only 
when 
accompanied 
by a 
quantitative 
statement of its 
uncertainty. This policy requires that NIST measurement 
results be accompanied by such statements and that a 
uniform approach to expressing measurement uncertainty 
be followed. 
1. Background 
Since the early 1980s, an international consensus has 
been developing on a uniform approach to the expression 
of uncertainty in measurement. Many of NIST’s sister 
national standards laboratories as well as a number of 
important metrological organizations, including the 
Western European Calibration Cooperation (WECC) and 
EUROMET, have adopted the approach recommended by 
the International Committee for Weights and Measures 
(CIPM) in 1981 [1] and reaffirmed by the CIPM in 1986 
[2]. 
Equally important, the CIPM approach has come into use 
in a significant number of areas at NIST and is also 
becoming accepted in U.S. industry. For example, the 
National Conference of Standards Laboratories (NCSL) 
is using it to develop a Recommended Practice on 
measurement uncertainty for NCSL member laboratories. 
The CIPM approach is based on Recommendation INC-1 
(1980) of the Working Group on the Statement of 
Uncertainties [3]. This group was convened in 1980 by 
the International Bureau of Weights and Measures (BIPM) 
in response to a request by the CIPM. More recently, at 
the request of the CIPM, a joint BIPM/IEC/ISO/OIML 
working group developed a comprehensive reference 
document on the general application of the CIPM 
approach titled Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in 
Measurement [4] (IEC: International Electrotechnical 
Commission; 
ISO: 
International 
Organization 
for 
Standardization; OIML: International Organization of 
Legal Metrology). The development of the Guide is 
providing further impetus to the worldwide adoption of 
the CIPM approach. 
2. Policy 
All NIST measurement results are to be accompanied by 
quantitative statements of uncertainty. To ensure that 
such statements are consistent with each other and with 
present international practice, this NIST policy adopts in 
substance the approach to expressing measurement 
uncertainty recommended by the International Committee 
for Weights and Measures (CIPM). The CIPM approach 
as adapted for use by NIST is: 
1) Standard Uncertainty: Represent each component of 
uncertainty that contributes to the uncertainty of the 
measurement result by an estimated standard deviation 
ui, termed standard uncertainty, equal to the positive 
square root of the estimated variance u2 
i. 
2) Combined Standard Uncertainty: Determine the 
combined standard uncertainty 
u 
of 
the
c 
measurement result, taken to represent the estimated 
standard deviation of the result, by combining the 
individual standard uncertainties ui (and covariances as 
appropriate) using the usual “root-sum-of-squares” 
method, or equivalent established and documented 
methods. 
Commonly, u
is used for reporting results of
c 
determinations of fundamental constants, fundamental 
metrological research, and international comparisons of 
realizations of SI units. 
NIST Administrative Manual 
4.09 Appendix E 
11

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
NIST Technical Communications Program 
3) Expanded Uncertainty: Determine an expanded 
uncertainty U by multiplying u by a coverage factor 
c 
k: U = ku . The purpose of U is to provide an interval 
c
y
U to y + U about the result y within which the 
value 
of 
Y, the specific quantity subject to 
measurement and estimated by y, can be asserted to lie 
with a high level of confidence. Thus one can 
confidently assert that y
U ≤ Y ≤ y + U, which is 
commonly written as Y = y ± U. 
Use expanded uncertainty U to report the results of all 
NIST measurements other than those for which uc has 
traditionally been employed. To be consistent with 
current international practice, the value of k to be 
used at NIST for calculating U is, by convention, 
k = 2. Values of k other than 2 are only to be used for 
specific applications dictated by established and 
documented requirements. 
4) Reporting Uncertainty: Report U together with the 
coverage factor k used to obtain it, or report u .
c
When reporting a measurement result and its 
uncertainty, include the following information in the 
report itself or by referring to a published document: 
– A list of all components of standard uncertainty, 
together with their degrees of freedom where 
appropriate, and the resulting value of u . The
c
components should be identified according to the 
method used to estimate their numerical values: 
A. 
those which are evaluated by statistical 
methods, 
B. 
those which are evaluated by other means. 
– A detailed description of how each component of 
standard uncertainty was evaluated. 
– A description of how k was chosen when k is not 
taken equal to 2. 
It is often desirable to provide a probability 
interpretation, such as a level of confidence, for the 
interval defined by U or u . When this is done, the 
c
basis for such a statement must be given. 
NIST Administrative Manual 
ii 
Additional guidance on the use of the CIPM approach at 
NIST may be found in Guidelines for Evaluating and 
Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
[5]. A more detailed discussion of the CIPM approach is 
given in the Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in 
Measurement [4]. Classic expositions of the statistical 
evaluation of measurement processes are given in 
references [6-8]. 
3. Responsibilities 
a. Operating Unit Directors are responsible for compliance 
with this policy. 
b. The Statistical Engineering Division, Computing and 
Applied Mathematics Laboratory, is responsible for 
providing technical advice on statistical methods for 
evaluating and expressing the uncertainty of NIST 
measurement results. 
c. NIST Editorial Review Boards are responsible for 
ensuring that statements of measurement uncertainty are 
included in NIST publications and other technical outputs 
under their jurisdiction which report measurement results 
and that such statements are in conformity with this 
policy. 
d. The Calibrations Advisory Group is responsible for 
ensuring that calibration and test reports and other 
technical outputs under its jurisdiction are in compliance 
with this policy. 
e. The Standard Reference Materials and Standard 
Reference Data programs are responsible for ensuring that 
technical 
outputs 
under their jurisdiction are in 
compliance with this policy. 
f. Authors, as part of the process of preparing 
manuscripts and other technical outputs, are responsible 
for formulating measurement uncertainty statements 
consistent with this policy. These statements must be 
present in drafts submitted for NIST review and approval. 
4.09 Appendix E 
12

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
NIST Technical Communications Program 
iii 
4. Exceptions 
October 1993. ISO/TAG 4 has as its sponsors the 
BIPM, IEC, IFCC (International Federation of 
It is understood that any valid statistical method that is 
Clinical Chemistry), ISO, IUPAC (International 
technically justified under the existing circumstances may 
Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry), IUPAP 
be used to determine the equivalent of ui, u , or U.
c
(International Union of Pure and Applied Physics), 
Further, it is recognized that international, national, or 
and OIML. Although the individual members of 
contractual agreements to which NIST is a party may 
WG 3 were nominated by the BIPM, IEC, ISO, or 
occasionally require deviation from this policy. In both 
OIML, the Guide is published by ISO in the name 
cases, the report of uncertainty must document what was 
of all seven organizations. NIST staff members may 
done and why. 
obtain a single copy of the Guide from the NIST 
Calibration Program. 
5. References Cited 
[5] 
B. N. Taylor and C. E. Kuyatt, Guidelines for 
Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST 
[1] 
CIPM, BIPM Proc. Verb. Com. Int. Poids et Mesures 
Measurement Results, NIST Technical Note 1297, 
49, 8-9, 26 (1981) (in French); P. Giacomo, “News 
prepared under the auspices of the NIST Ad Hoc 
from the BIPM,” Metrologia 18, 41-44 (1982). 
Committee 
on 
Uncertainty 
Statements 
(U.S. 
[2] 
CIPM, BIPM Proc.-Verb. Com. Int. Poids et Mesures 
54, 14, 35 (1986) (in French); P. Giacomo, “News 
Government Printing 
January 1993). 
Office, Washington, DC, 
from the BIPM,” Metrologia 24, 45-51 (1987). 
[6] 
C. Eisenhart, “Realistic Evaluation of the Precision 
[3] 
R. Kaarls, “Rapport du Groupe de Travail sur 
l’Expression 
des 
Incertitudes 
au 
Comité 
International des Poids et Mesures,” Proc.-Verb. 
Com. Int. Poids et Mesures 49, A1-A12 (1981) (in 
French); P. Giacomo, “News from the BIPM,” 
Metrologia 17, 69-74 (1981). (Note that the final 
English-language version of Recommendation INC-
and Accuracy of Instrument Calibration Systems,” 
J. Res. Natl. Bur. Stand. (U.S.) 67C, 161-187 (1963). 
Reprinted, 
with 
corrections, 
in 
Precision 
Measurement and Calibration: Statistical Concepts 
and Procedures, NBS Special Publication 300, Vol. 
I, H. H. Ku, Editor (U.S. Government Printing 
Office, Washington, DC, 1969), pp. 21-48. 
1 (1980), published in an internal BIPM report, 
[7] 
J. Mandel, The Statistical Analysis of Experimental 
differs slightly from that given in the latter 
Data (Interscience-Wiley Publishers, New York, 
reference but is consistent with the authoritative 
NY, 1964, out of print; corrected and reprinted, 
French-language version given in the former 
Dover Publishers, New York, NY, 1984). 
reference.) 
[8] 
M. G. Natrella, Experimental Statistics, NBS 
[4] 
ISO, Guide to the Expression of Uncertainty in 
Handbook 91 (U.S. Government Printing Office, 
Measurement, prepared by ISO Technical Advisory 
Washington, DC, 1963; reprinted October 1966 with 
Group 4 (TAG 4), Working Group 3 (WG 3), 
corrections). 
NIST Administrative Manual 
4.09 Appendix E 
13

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
Appendix D 
Clarification and Additional Guidance 
As indicated in our Preface to this second (1994) edition of 
TN 1297, Appendix D has been added to clarify and 
provide additional guidance on a number of topics. It was 
prepared in response to questions asked since the publication 
of the first (1993) edition. 
D.1 Terminology 
D.1.1 
There are a number of terms that are commonly 
used in connection with the subject of measurement 
uncertainty, 
such 
as 
accuracy 
of 
measurement, 
reproducibility of results of measurements, and correction. 
One can avoid confusion by using such terms in a way that 
is consistent with other international documents. 
Definitions of many of these terms are given in the 
International Vocabulary of Basic and General Terms in 
Metrology [D.1], the title of which is commonly abbreviated 
VIM. The VIM and the Guide may be viewed as companion 
documents inasmuch as the VIM, like the Guide, was 
developed by ISO Technical Advisory Group 4 (TAG 4), in 
this case by its Working Group 1 (WG 1); and the VIM, 
like the Guide, was published by ISO in the name of the 
seven organizations that participate in the work of TAG 4. 
Indeed, the Guide contains the VIM definitions of 24 
relevant terms. For the convenience of the users of 
TN 1297, the definitions of eight of these terms are included 
here. 
NOTE – In the following definitions, the use of parentheses around 
certain words of some terms means that the words may by omitted if 
this is unlikely to cause confusion. The VIM identification number for 
a particular term is shown in brackets after the term. 
D.1.1.1 accuracy of measurement [VIM 3.5] 
closeness of the agreement between the result of a 
measurement and the value of the measurand 
NOTES 
1 “Accuracy” is a qualitative concept. 
2 The term precision should not be used for “accuracy.” 
TN 1297 Comments: 
1 The phrase “a true value of the measurand” (or 
sometimes simply “a true value”), which is used in the VIM 
definition of this and other terms, has been replaced here 
and elsewhere with the phrase “the value of the measurand.” 
This has been done to reflect the view of the Guide, which 
we share, that “a true value of a measurand” is simply the 
value of the measurand. (See subclause D.3.5 of the Guide 
for further discussion.) 
2 Because “accuracy” is a qualitative concept, one should 
not use it quantitatively, that is, associate numbers with it; 
numbers should be associated with measures of uncertainty 
instead. Thus one may write “the standard uncertainty is 
2 µΩ” but not “the accuracy is 2 µΩ.” 
3 To avoid confusion and the proliferation of undefined, 
qualitative terms, we recommend that the word “inaccuracy” 
not be used. 
4 The VIM does not give a definition for “precision” 
because of the many definitions that exist for this word. For 
a discussion of precision, see subsection D.1.2. 
D.1.1.2 repeatability (of results of measurements) [VIM 
3.6] 
closeness of the agreement between the results of successive 
measurements of the same measurand carried out under the 
same conditions of measurement 
NOTES 
1 These conditions are called repeatability conditions 
2 Repeatability conditions include: 
– the same measurement procedure 
– the same observer 
– the same measuring instrument, used under the same 
conditions 
– the same location 
– repetition over a short period of time. 
3 Repeatability may be expressed quantitatively in terms of the 
dispersion characteristics of the results. 
D.1.1.3 reproducibility (of results of measurements) 
[VIM 3.7] 
closeness of the agreement between the results of 
measurements of the same measurand carried out under 
changed conditions of measurement 
NOTES 
1 A valid statement of reproducibility requires specification of the 
conditions changed. 
2 The changed conditions may include: 
– principle of measurement 
– method of measurement 
– observer 
14

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
– measuring instrument 
– reference standard 
– location 
– conditions of use 
– time. 
3 Reproducibility may be expressed quantitatively in terms of the 
dispersion characteristics of the results. 
4 Results are here usually understood to be corrected results. 
D.1.1.4 error (of measurement) [VIM 3.10] 
result of a measurement minus the value of the measurand 
NOTES 
1 Since the value of the measurand cannot be determined, in practice 
a conventional value is [sometimes] used (see [VIM] 1.19 and 1.20). 
2 When it is necessary to distinguish “error” from “relative error,” the 
former is sometimes called absolute error of measurement. This 
should not be confused with absolute value of error, which is the 
modulus of the error. 
TN 1297 Comments: 
1 As pointed out in the Guide, if the result of a 
measurement depends on the values of quantities other than 
the measurand, the errors of the measured values of these 
quantities contribute to the error of the result of the 
measurement. 
2 In general, the error of measurement is unknown because 
the value of the measurand is unknown. However, the 
uncertainty of the result of a measurement may be 
evaluated. 
3 As also pointed out in the Guide, if a device (taken to 
include measurement standards, reference materials, etc.) is 
tested through a comparison with a known reference 
standard and the uncertainties associated with the standard 
and the comparison procedure can be assumed to be 
negligible relative to the required uncertainty of the test, the 
comparison may be viewed as determining the error of the 
device. 
D.1.1.5 random error [VIM 3.13] 
result of a measurement minus the mean that would result 
from an infinite number of measurements of the same 
measurand carried out under repeatability conditions 
NOTES 
1 Random error is equal to error minus systematic error. 
2 Because only a finite number of measurements can be made, it is 
possible to determine only an estimate of random error. 
TN 1297 Comment: 
The concept of random error is also often applied when the 
conditions of measurement are changed (see subsection 
D.1.1.3). For example, one can conceive of obtaining 
measurement results from many different observers while 
holding all other conditions constant, and then calculating 
the mean of the results as well as an appropriate measure of 
their dispersion (e.g., the variance or standard deviation of 
the results). 
D.1.1.6 systematic error [VIM 3.14] 
mean that would result from an infinite number of 
measurements of the same measurand carried out under 
repeatability conditions minus the value of the measurand 
NOTES 
1 Systematic error is equal to error minus random error. 
2 Like the value of the measurand, systematic error and its causes 
cannot be completely known. 
3 For a measuring instrument, see “bias” ([VIM] 5.25). 
TN 1297 Comments: 
1 As pointed out in the Guide, the error of the result of a 
measurement may often be considered as arising from a 
number of random and systematic effects that contribute 
individual components of error to the error of the result. 
2 Although the term bias is often used as a synonym for 
the term systematic error, because systematic error is 
defined in a broadly applicable way in the VIM while bias 
is defined only in connection with a measuring instrument, 
we recommend the use of the term systematic error. 
D.1.1.7 correction [VIM 3.15] 
value added algebraically to the uncorrected result of a 
measurement to compensate for systematic error 
NOTES 
1 The correction is equal to the negative of the estimated systematic 
error. 
2 Since the systematic error cannot be known perfectly, the 
compensation cannot be complete. 
D.1.1.8 correction factor [VIM 3.16] 
numerical factor by which the uncorrected result of a 
measurement is multiplied to compensate for systematic 
error 
15

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
NOTE – Since the systematic error cannot be known perfectly, the 
compensation cannot be complete. 
D.1.2 
As indicated in subsection D.1.1.1, TN 1297 
comment 4, the VIM does not give a definition for the word 
“precision.” However, ISO 3534-1 [D.2] defines precision 
to mean “the closeness of agreement between independent 
test results obtained under stipulated conditions.” Further, it 
views the concept of precision as encompassing both 
repeatability and reproducibility (see subsections D.1.1.2 and 
D.1.1.3) since it defines repeatability as “precision under 
repeatability conditions,” and reproducibility as “precision 
under reproducibility conditions.” Nevertheless, precision is 
often taken to mean simply repeatability. 
The term precision, as well as the terms accuracy, 
repeatability, reproducibility, variability, and uncertainty, are 
examples of terms that represent qualitative concepts and 
thus should be used with care. In particular, it is our strong 
recommendation that such terms not be used as synonyms 
or labels for quantitative estimates. For example, the 
statement “the precision of the measurement results, 
expressed as the standard deviation obtained under 
repeatability conditions, is 2 µΩ” is acceptable, but the 
statement “the precision of the measurement results is 2 
µΩ” is not. (See also subsection D.1.1.1, TN 1297 comment 
2.) 
Although reference [D.2] states that “The measure of 
precision is usually expressed in terms of imprecision and 
computed as a standard deviation of the test results,” we 
recommend that to avoid confusion, the word “imprecision” 
not be used; standard deviation and standard uncertainty are 
preferred, as appropriate (see subsection D.1.5). 
It should also be borne in mind that the NIST policy on 
expressing the uncertainty of measurement results normally 
requires the use of the terms standard uncertainty, combined 
standard uncertainty, expanded uncertainty, or their 
“relative” forms (see subsection D.1.4), and the listing of all 
components of standard uncertainty. Hence the use of terms 
such as accuracy, precision, and bias should normally be as 
adjuncts to the required terms and their relationship to the 
required terms should be made clear. This situation is 
similar to the NIST policy on the use of units that are not 
part of the SI: the SI units must be stated first, with the 
units that are not part of the SI in parentheses (see 
subsection D.6.2). 
D.1.3 
The designations “A” and “B” apply to the two 
distinct methods by which uncertainty components may be 
evaluated. However, for convenience, a standard uncertainty 
obtained from a Type A evaluation may be called a Type A 
standard uncertainty; and a standard uncertainty obtained 
from a type B evaluation may be called a Type B standard 
uncertainty. This means that: 
(1) “A” and “B” have nothing to do with the traditional 
terms “random” and “systematic”; 
(2) there are no “Type A errors” or “Type B errors”; and 
(3) “Random uncertainty” (i.e., an uncertainty component 
that arises from a random effect) is not a synonym for 
Type 
A 
standard 
uncertainty; 
and 
“systematic 
uncertainty” (i.e., an uncertainty component that arises 
from a correction for a systematic error) is not a 
synonym for Type B standard uncertainty. 
In fact, we recommend that the terms “random uncertainty” 
and “systematic uncertainty” be avoided because the 
adjectives “random” and “systematic,” while appropriate 
modifiers for the word “error,” are not appropriate modifiers 
for the word “uncertainty” (one can hardly imagine an 
uncertainty component that varies randomly or that is 
systematic). 
D.1.4 
If u(xi) is a standard uncertainty, then u(xi)/ 
, 
xi≠0, is the corresponding relative standard uncertainty; if 
u ( y) is a combined standard uncertainty, then u ( y)/ 
xi 
y ,
c
c
y≠0, is the corresponding relative combined standard 
uncertainty; and if U=ku ( y) is an expanded uncertainty, 
c
then U/ y , y≠0, is the corresponding relative expanded 
uncertainty. Such relative uncertainties may be readily 
indicated by using a subscript “r” for the word “relative.” 
Thus u (xi)≡u(xi)/ 
, u
( y)≡u ( y)/ y , and U ≡U/ y .
xi
r
c,r
c
r
D.1.5 
As pointed out in subsection D.1.2, the use of the 
terms standard uncertainty, combined standard uncertainty, 
expanded uncertainty, or their equivalent “relative” forms 
(see subsection D.1.4), is normally required by NIST policy. 
Alternate terms should therefore play a subsidiary role in 
any NIST publication that reports the result of a 
measurement and its uncertainty. However, since it will take 
some time before the meanings of these terms become well 
known, they should be defined at the beginning of a paper 
or when first used. In the latter case, this may be done by 
writing, for example, “the standard uncertainty (estimated 
standard deviation) is u(R)=2 µΩ”; or “the expanded 
uncertainty (coverage factor k=2 and thus a two-standard-
deviation estimate) is U=4 µΩ.” 
It should also be recognized that, while an estimated 
standard deviation that is a component of uncertainty of a 
measurement result is properly called a “standard 
16

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
uncertainty,” not every estimated standard deviation is 
necessarily a standard uncertainty. 
D.1.6 
Words such as “estimated” or “limits of” should 
normally not be used to modify “standard uncertainty,” 
“combined standard uncertainty,” “expanded uncertainty,” 
the “relative” forms of these terms (see subsection D.1.4), 
or more generally “uncertainty.” The word “uncertainty,” by 
its very nature, implies that the uncertainty of the result of 
a measurement is an estimate and generally does not have 
well-defined limits. 
D.1.7 
The phrase “components of uncertainty that 
contribute to the uncertainty of the measurement result” can 
have two distinct meanings. For example, if the input 
estimates xi are uncorrelated, Eq. (A-3) of Appendix A may 
be written as 
(D-1) 
where ci ≡∂f/∂xi and ui( y) ≡ 
u(xi).
ci 
In Eq. (D-1), both u(xi) and ui( y) can be considered 
components of uncertainty of the measurement result y. This 
is because the u(xi) are the standard uncertainties of the 
input estimates xi on which the output estimate or 
measurement result y depends; and the ui( y) are the 
standard uncertainties of which the combined standard 
uncertainty u ( y) of the measurement result y is composed. 
c
In short, both u(xi) and ui( y) can be viewed as components 
of uncertainty that give rise to the combined standard 
uncertainty u ( y) of the measurement result y. This implies 
c
that in subsections 2.4 to 2.6, 4.4 to 4.6, and 6.6; in 1) and 
2) of section 2 of Appendix C; and in section 4 of Appendix 
C, the symbols ui, si, or uj may be viewed as representing 
either u(xi) or ui( y). 
When one gives the components of uncertainty of a result 
of a measurement, it is recommended that one also give the 
standard uncertainties u(xi) of the input estimates xi, the 
sensitivity coefficients ci ≡∂f/∂xi, and the standard 
uncertainties ui( y) = 
u(xi) of which the combined 
standard uncertainty u ( y) is composed (so-called standard 
ci 
c
uncertainty components of combined standard uncertainty). 
D.1.8 
The VIM gives the name “experimental standard 
deviation of the mean” to the quantity s(Xi) of Eq. (A-5) of 
Appendix A of this Technical Note, and the name 
“experimental standard deviation” to the quantity s(Xi,k) = 
⎯√n s(Xi). We believe that these are convenient, descriptive 
terms, and therefore suggest that NIST authors consider 
using them. 
D.2 Identification of uncertainty components 
D.2.1 
The NIST policy on expressing measurement 
uncertainty states that all components of standard 
uncertainty “should be identified according to the method 
used to estimate their numerical values: A. those which are 
evaluated by statistical methods, B. those which are 
evaluated by other means.” 
Such identification will usually be readily apparent in the 
“detailed description of how each component of standard 
uncertainty was evaluated” that is required by the NIST 
policy. However, such identification can also be given in a 
table which lists the components of standard uncertainty. 
Tables D.1 and D.2, which are based on the end-gauge 
Table D.1 – Uncertainty Budget: 
End-Gauge Calibration 
Source of 
uncertainty 
Standard 
uncertainty 
(nm) 
Calibration of standard end 
gauge 
25 (B) 
Measured difference between 
end gauges: 
repeated observations 
random effects of 
comparator 
systematic effects of 
comparator 
5.8 (A) 
3.9 (A) 
6.7 (B) 
Thermal expansion of 
standard end gauge 
1.7 (B) 
Temperature of test bed: 
mean temperature of bed 
cyclic variation of 
temperature of room 
5.8 (A) 
10.2 (B) 
Difference in expansion 
coefficients of end gauges 
2.9 (B) 
Difference in temperatures of 
end gauges 
16.6 (B) 
Combined standard uncertainty: u (l) = 34 nm 
c
17

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
Table D.2 – Uncertainty Budget: End-Gauge Calibration 
Source of 
uncertainty 
Standard uncertainties 
from random effects 
in the current measurement process 
(nm) 
Standard uncertainties 
from systematic effects 
in the current measurement process 
(nm) 
Type A 
evaluation 
Type B 
evaluation 
Type A 
evaluation 
Type B 
evaluation 
Calibration of standard end gauge 
25 
Measured difference between end 
gauges: 
repeated observations 
random effects of comparator 
systematic effects of 
comparator 
5.8 
3.9 
6.7 
Thermal expansion of standard 
end gauge 
1.7 
Temperature of test bed: 
mean temperature of bed 
cyclic variation of temperature 
of room 
5.8 
10.2 
Difference in expansion 
coefficients of end gauges 
2.9 
Difference in temperatures of end 
gauges 
16.6 
Combined standard uncertainty: u (l) = 34 nm 
c
calibration example of the Guide (subclause H.1), are two 
examples of such tables. 
D.2.2 
In Table D.1, the method used to evaluate a 
particular standard uncertainty is shown in parentheses. In 
Table D.2, the method is indicated by using different 
columns. The latter table also shows how one can indicate 
whether a component arose from a random effect in the 
current measurement process or from a systematic effect in 
the current measurement process, assuming that such 
information is believed to be useful to the reader. 
If a standard uncertainty is obtained from a source outside 
of the current measurement process and the nature of its 
individual components are unknown (which will often be the 
case), it may be classified as having been obtained from a 
Type B evaluation. If the standard uncertainty from an 
outside source is known to be composed of components 
obtained from both Type A and Type B evaluations but the 
magnitudes of the individual components are unknown, then 
one may indicate this by using (A,B) rather than (B) in a 
table such as D.1. 
On the other hand, a standard uncertainty known to be 
composed of components obtained from Type A evaluations 
alone should be classified as a Type A standard uncertainty, 
while a standard uncertainty known to be composed of 
components obtained from Type B evaluations alone should 
be classified as a Type B standard uncertainty. 
In this same vein, if the combined standard uncertainty 
u ( y) of the measurement result y is obtained from Type A 
c
standard uncertainties (and covariances) only, it too may be 
considered Type A, even though no direct observations were 
18

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
made of the measurand Y of which the measurement result 
y is an estimate. Similarly, if a combined standard 
uncertainty is obtained from Type B standard uncertainties 
(and covariances) only, it too may be considered Type B. 
D.3 Equation (A-2) 
D.3.1 
In the most general sense, Eq. (A-2) of Appendix 
A of this Technical Note, 
(A-2) 
is a symbolic representation of the procedure (or algorithm) 
used to obtain the output estimate y, which is the result of 
the measurement, from the individual input estimates xi. For 
example, some of the xi may themselves depend on 
additional input estimates: 
Or the output estimate y may be expressible simply as 
where the Ci are corrections, for example, for the operator, 
for the ambient temperature, for the laboratory, etc. Some or 
all of the Ci may be estimated to be near zero based on the 
available information, but they can still have standard 
uncertainties that are large enough to contribute significantly 
to the combined standard uncertainty of the measurement 
result and which therefore must be evaluated. 
NOTE – In some situations, a correction for a particular effect and its 
standard uncertainty are estimated to be negligible relative to the 
required combined standard uncertainty of the measurement result, and 
for added confidence, an experimental test is carried out that confirms 
the estimate but the standard uncertainty of the test result is not 
negligible. In such cases, if other evidence indicates that the estimate 
is in fact reliable, the standard uncertainty of the test result need not be 
included in the uncertainty budget and both the correction and its 
standard uncertainty can be taken as negligible. 
D.4 Measurand defined by the measurement method; 
characterization of test methods; simple calibration 
D.4.1 
The approach to evaluating and expressing the 
uncertainty of a measurement result on which the NIST 
policy and this Technical Note are based is applicable to 
evaluating and expressing the uncertainty of the estimated 
value of a measurand that is defined by a standard method 
of measurement. In this case, the uncertainty depends not 
only on the repeatability and reproducibility of the 
measurement results (see subsections D.1.1.2 and D.1.1.3), 
but also on how well one believes the standard measurement 
method has been implemented. (See example H.6 of the 
Guide.) 
When reporting the estimated value and uncertainty of such 
a measurand, one should always make clear that the 
measurand is defined by a particular method of 
measurement and indicate what that method is. One should 
also give the measurand a name which indicates that it is 
defined by a measurement method, for example, by adding 
a modifier such as “conventional.” (See also subsection 
D.6.1) 
D.4.2 
There are national as well as international standards 
that discuss the characterization of test methods by 
interlaboratory comparisons. Execution of test methods 
according to these standards, both in the characterization 
stage and in subsequent measurement programs, often calls 
for the expression of uncertainties in terms of defined 
measures of repeatability and reproducibility. When NIST 
authors participate in such characterization or measurement 
programs, NIST policy allows for the results to be expressed 
as required by the relevant standards (see Appendix C, 
section 4). However, when NIST authors document work 
according to such standards, they should consider making 
the resulting publication understandable to a broad audience. 
This might be achieved in part by giving definitions of the 
terms used, perhaps in a footnote. If possible, NIST authors 
should relate these terms to those of this Technical Note and 
of the Guide. 
If a test method is employed at NIST to obtain measurement 
results for reasons other than those described above, it is 
expected that the uncertainties of these measurement results 
will be evaluated and reported according to section 2 of the 
NIST policy (see Appendix C). This would be the case, for 
example, if measurement results from a characterized test 
method are compared to those from a new method of 
measurement which has not been characterized by 
interlaboratory comparisons. 
D.4.3 
When an unknown standard is calibrated in terms 
of a known reference standard at lower levels of the 
measurement hierarchy, the uncertainty of the result of 
calibration may have as few as two components: a single 
Type A standard uncertainty evaluated from the pooled 
experimental standard deviation that characterizes the 
calibration process; and a single Type B (or possibly 
19

Guidelines for Evaluating and Expressing the Uncertainty of NIST Measurement Results 
Type A) standard uncertainty obtained from the calibration 
certificate of the known reference standard. 
NOTE – The possibility of unsuspected systematic effects in the 
calibration process used to calibrate the unknown standard should, 
however, not be overlooked. 
D.5 t and the quantile t1
p 
α 
D.5.1 
As pointed out in the Guide, the t-distribution is 
often tabulated in quantiles. That is, values of the quantile 
are given, where 1 
α denotes the cumulative 
t1 α 
probability and the relation 
t1– α
⌠
1 
α 
f(t , ν )dt
⌡ ∞ 
defines the quantile, where f is the probability density 
function of t. Thus t
of this Technical Note and of the 
p 
Guide and t1 α are related by p 
1
2α. For example, the 
value of the quantile t0.975, for which 1 
α 
0.975 and 
α 
0.025 , is the same as tp(ν ) for p 
0.95. It should be 
noted, however, that in reference [D.2] the symbol p is used 
for the cumulative probability 1 
α, and the resulting tp(ν) 
is called the “quantile of order p of the t variable with ν 
degrees of freedom.” Clearly, the values of tp(ν ) defined in 
this way differ from the values of tp(ν ) defined as in this 
Technical Note and in the Guide, and given in Table B.1 
(which is of the same form as that given in reference [10]). 
Thus, one must use tables of tabulated values of tp(ν ) with 
some care. 
D.6 Uncertainty and units of the SI; proper use of the 
SI and quantity and unit symbols 
D.6.1 
As pointed out in the Guide, the result of a 
measurement is sometimes expressed in terms of the 
adopted value of a measurement standard or in terms of a 
conventional reference value rather than in terms of the 
relevant unit of the SI. (This is an example of a situation in 
which all significant components of uncertainty are not 
taken into account.) In such cases the magnitude of the 
uncertainty ascribable to the measurement result may be 
significantly smaller than when that result is expressed in 
the relevant SI unit. This practice is not disallowed by the 
NIST policy, but it should always be made clear when the 
practice is being followed. In addition, one should always 
give some indication of the values of the components of 
uncertainty not taken into account. The following example 
is taken from the Guide. (See also subsection D.4.1.) 
EXAMPLE – A high-quality Zener voltage standard is calibrated by 
comparison with a Josephson effect voltage reference based on the 
conventional value of the Josephson constant recommended for 
international use by the CIPM. The relative combined standard 
uncertainty u (VS )/VS of the calibrated potential difference VS of the 
c
Zener standard is 2×10 8 when VS is reported in terms of the 
conventional value, but u (VS )/VS is 4×10 7 when VS is reported in 
c
terms of the SI unit of potential difference, the volt (V), because of the 
additional uncertainty associated with the SI value of the Josephson 
constant. 
D.6.2 
NIST Special Publication 811, 1995 Edition [D.3], 
gives guidance on the use of the SI and on the rules and 
style conventions regarding quantity and unit symbols. In 
particular, it elaborates upon the NIST policy regarding the 
SI and explains why abbreviations such as ppm and ppb and 
terms such as normality and molarity should not be used. 
NIST authors should consult NIST SP 811 if they have any 
questions concerning the proper way to express the values 
of quantities and their uncertainties. 
D.7 References 
[D.1] ISO, International Vocabulary of Basic and General 
Terms 
in 
Metrology, 
second 
edition 
(International 
Organization for Standardization, Geneva, Switzerland, 
1993). This document (abbreviated VIM) was prepared by 
ISO Technical Advisory Group 4 (TAG 4), Working Group 
1 (WG 1). ISO/TAG 4 has as its sponsors the BIPM, IEC, 
IFCC (International Federation of Clinical Chemistry), ISO, 
IUPAC (International Union of Pure and Applied 
Chemistry), IUPAP (International Union of Pure and 
Applied Physics), and OIML. The individual members of 
WG 1 were nominated by BIPM, IEC, IFCC, ISO, IUPAC 
IUPAP, or OIML, and the document is published by ISO in 
the name of all seven organizations. NIST staff members 
may obtain a single copy of the VIM from the NIST 
Calibration Program. 
[D.2] ISO 3534-1:1993, Statistics — Vocabulary and symbols 
— Part 1: Probability and general statistical terms 
(International Organization for Standardization, Geneva, 
Switzerland, 1993). 
[D.3] B. N. Taylor, Guide for the Use of the International 
System of Units (SI), NIST Special Publication 811, 1995 
Edition (U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC, 
April 1995). 
20